WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in
Robot-Assisted Feeding
Akhil Padmanabha
∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
akhilpad@andrew.cmu.edu
Jessie Yuan
∗
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
jzyuan@andrew.cmu.edu
Tanisha Mehta
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
tsmehta@andrew.cmu.edu
Rajat Kumar Jenamani
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
rj277@cornell.edu
Eric Hu
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
elh245@cornell.edu
Victoria de León
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
vrodrig2@andrew.cmu.edu
Anthony Wertz
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
awertz@cs.cmu.edu
Janavi Gupta
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
janavig@andrew.cmu.edu
Ben Dodson
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
bzd4@cornell.edu
Yunting Yan
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
yy2244@cornell.edu
Carmel Majidi
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
cmajidi@andrew.cmu.edu
Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee
†
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA
tapomayukh@cornell.edu
Zackory Erickson
†
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
zackory@cmu.edu
Throat Mic.
Glasses with IMU
Data Collection PipelineEvaluations
Obi Feeding 
Robot
15 Participants 
without 
Impairments 
Inertial Measurement UnitThroat Mic.
Time (s) Till Next Bite
Stop RobotProgress Robot
FEAST 
Robot
Obi 
Feeding 
Robot
Model
14 
Participants 
without 
Impairments
2 Participants with Impairments
Figure 1: We present WAFFLE, Wearable Approach For Feeding with LEarned Bite Timing, a bite timing algorithm for assistive
feeding robots that generalizes across users with and without motor impairments, feeding robots, robot positioning, feeding
trajectories, foods, and both individual and social dining settings. We collect data from 14 participants without impairments
using the Obi robot to train a machine learning model that estimates the time until the next bite. At deployment, a user-selected
assertiveness threshold is used to convert predictions into robot stop and progress commands. Lastly, we evaluate WAFFLE
using two different robots with 15 participants without impairments and 2 participants with motor impairments in the home.
Abstract
Millions of people around the world need assistance with feeding.
Robotic feeding systems offer the potential to enhance autonomy
and quality of life for individuals with impairments and reduce
caregiver workload. However, their widespread adoption has been
limited by technical challenges such as estimating bite timing, the
∗
Equal Contribution.
†
Equal Advising.
appropriate moment for the robot to transfer food to a user’s mouth.
In this work, we introduce WAFFLE: Wearable Approach For
Feeding with LEarned Bite Timing, a system that accurately pre-
dicts bite timing by leveraging wearable sensor data to be highly
reactive to natural user cues such as head movements, chewing,
and talking. We train a supervised regression model on bite tim-
ing data from 14 participants and incorporate a user-adjustable
assertiveness threshold to convert predictions into proceed or stop
arXiv:2510.03910v1  [cs.RO]  4 Oct 2025
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
commands. In a study with 15 participants without motor impair-
ments with the Obi feeding robot, WAFFLE performs statistically
on par with or better than baseline methods across measures of
feeling of control, robot understanding, and workload, and is pre-
ferred by the majority of participants for both individual and social
dining. We further demonstrate WAFFLE’s generalizability in a
study with 2 participants with motor impairments in their home
environments using a Kinova 7DOF robot. Our findings support
WAFFLE’s effectiveness in enabling natural, reactive bite timing
that generalizes across users, robot hardware, robot positioning,
feeding trajectories, foods, and both individual and social dining
contexts. Videos are located on our project website
1 2
.
1  Introduction
According to the World Health Organization, nearly 190 million
people worldwide live with motor impairments [48], often needing
assistance with Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) such as eating,
bathing, and dressing [9,16]. Specifically, around 3.5 million people
in the United States alone require assistance with feeding, with
this estimate increasing as the population ages [16]. For individ-
uals with impairments, feeding assistance from a caregiver can
yield feelings of anxiety and self-consciousness, and a sense of
burden [19,28,45]. Physical caregiving robotics have shown their
utility in a variety of activities of daily living (ADLs) including
feeding assistance, increasing independence, quality of life, and
well-being for individuals with impairments [27,28,30,34,36,51].
For feeding, although commercial robots like the FDA-compliant
Obi Robot [26] are available, their adoption remains limited, in
part due to technical limitations in food acquisition, bite transfer,
bite timing, and user interfacing. Notably, Obi relies on manually
programmed trajectories and does not adapt its motions to varia-
tions in user behavior or food positioning, limiting its flexibility in
real-world use. Recent research has focused on addressing these
challenges [21, 22, 29, 31, 37, 47].
In this work, we focus on bite timing, the appropriate moment
for a robot to deliver food to a user. Bite timing is an important
component of robot-assisted feeding with prior research highlight-
ing the value users place on having multiple options for triggering
bite timing and on the adaptability of the timing itself [5,21,28].
Most existing approaches rely on users manually initiating bite
timing, often through actions like opening their mouth. However,
such methods can be distracting and intrusive, particularly in social
dining contexts [28,31]. While learning-based methods such as
SoNNET [31] aim to reduce disruptions and workload, they depend
on constrained setups with fixed, external sensors and multiple
diners, limiting practicality in diverse user settings. These limi-
tations point to the need for approaches to bite timing that are
both generalizable and practical across a wider range of real-world
scenarios.
Caregivers often rely on behavioral cues, such as head move-
ments, chewing, and speaking, to determine when to offer the
next bite during assisted feeding. To sense and act on these cues,
we present a system named WAFFLE: Wearable Approach For
Feeding with LEarned Bite Timing, consisting of wearable sensors
1
https://sites.google.com/view/bitetiming/
2
This research is supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE1745016 and DGE2140739.
for estimation of bite timing for both individual and social dining
scenarios, designed to work with any robotic feeding platform posi-
tioning, any robot feeding trajectory, any foods, and any user. The
wearables, an inertial measurement unit (IMU) mounted on a pair
of glasses and a throat contact microphone worn around the neck,
provide our system with cues often used by caregivers during the
feeding process including a user’s head movements and when they
are chewing and talking. The wearables are privacy-preserving as
the throat microphone does not record ambient sounds.
As seen in Fig. 1, in order to develop a supervised learning al-
gorithm for bite timing estimation, we conduct a data collection
study with 14 individuals without motor impairments with the Obi
robot [26] feeding from the front. We use this wearable data to
train a bite timing regression algorithm to estimate the time until
the next bite. To include user preference into how assertive the
robot is during deployment, we use a simple user-selected thresh-
old to convert predictions into progress / stop commands for the
robot. In an initial evaluation study with 15 individuals without
motor impairments using the Obi robot and feeding from the side,
we compare our WAFFLE (Wearables) method with two baselines,
Mouth Open and Fixed Interval. Results show that WAFFLE per-
forms statistically on par with or better than the baselines in both
individual and social dining across all metrics, including feeling
of control, robot understanding, and seamlessness. We also find
that the Wearables method is strongly preferred by participants in
contrast to current bite timing approaches. Our method performs
strongly in a second evaluation study with two participants with
motor impairments and the FEAST system [21], which consists of a
Kinova 7DOF robot arm feeding from the front with both in-mouth
and out-of-mouth bite transfer, demonstrating its effectiveness and
ability to generalize to participants with impairments and other
feeding robots. Lastly, we find that participants are well accepting
of our wearables, reporting that both the IMU-equipped glasses
and throat microphone were unobtrusive and quickly faded from
attention during use, further supporting the system’s practicality
for real-world deployment in daily dining scenarios.
2  Related Work
2.1  Robot-Assisted Feeding
Past research in robot-assisted feeding has focused primarily on
food acquisition [8,10,11,13,14,23–25,46,47], bite transfer [4,22,
44], and system/interface design [2,5,6,12,17,21,28,29,37,38,
53]. For bite timing, many of these works have relied on manual
triggering by participants through a button or assistive interface,
fixed-interval timing, or open-mouth detection [6,21,28,38,39,43].
In contrast, Ondras et al. introduced the SoNNET algorithm,
which employs three RGB-D cameras and a microphone array
placed centrally on the dining table to predict bite timing during
social dining scenarios [31]. The authors collected an initial dataset
with participants without impairments dining alongside two co-
diners, capturing multimodal data under low background noise
conditions. Their algorithm performs binary classification using
features extracted from the RGB-D cameras and microphone array
to determine whether the user intends to take a bite and triggers the
robot to proceed along the entire feeding trajectory when a positive
prediction is made. While their study found that participants pre-
ferred the predicted bite timing over two baseline methods (Mouth
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
Open and Fixed Interval), no statistical significance was observed
between SoNNET and the Mouth Open baseline for most metrics,
indicating room for improvement. Furthermore, the system’s strong
dependence on fixed sensor placement, presence of two co-diners,
and controlled acoustic conditions limits its generalizability to ev-
eryday environments such as restaurants, where sensor occlusion,
user diversity, and privacy concerns are more pronounced. The ap-
proach has also not been extended to individual dining or evaluated
with individuals with motor impairments, different robot platforms,
or varied robot and sensor orientations. In comparison, our method
works across both individual and social dining scenarios, uses com-
mon wearable sensors, is robust to background acoustic noise, and
has been evaluated with 2 participants with impairments and two
different robotic systems in varied orientations, achieving statisti-
cally significant improvements across many metrics compared to
the baseline methods.
2.2  Wearable Sensing
Wearable sensing involving accelerometers, inertial measurement
units (IMUs), and contact microphones has been useful for identi-
fication of various human movements [15,32,52] and for control
of mobile robots for activities of daily living during robotic care-
giving tasks [34–36]. Past work has shown that wearables can
successfully capture chewing and swallowing using acoustic, in-
ertial, electromyography (EMG), piezoelectric, or a fusion of the
aforementioned sensing methods [3,40,42,50]. Positioning of the
sensors on the human body is important with wearable sensors
often mounted on the inner/outer ear, head, neck, and chest [50].
Visual approaches using external mounted cameras have shown
promise for chewing and swallowing detection but require the user
to be within the view of the camera continuously [18,49]. Insights
from these past works on the types of wearable sensing methods
and the placements of these sensors show promise for using a
fusion of wearable sensing modalities, specifically IMUs and con-
tact microphones, for estimation of bite timing for robot-assisted
feeding.
3  Methods
Bite timing is a challenging problem: it often depends on a sub-
conscious sense of when it feels appropriate to take a bite of food,
especially during social dining scenarios. The problem becomes
more complicated since there are often many valid timings and
robot motions that result in an appropriate bite. Bite timing is also
dynamic; for example, a person may lift food to their mouth, pause,
and only proceed to eat at a very specific moment. We hypothesize
that a robot can achieve appropriate bite timing by being highly
reactive to natural user cues from wearable sensor data, including
chewing, speaking, and head movements. Our goal is to develop a
system that is generalizable across all variables in a robot-assisted
feeding setting, including different users, feeding robots, robot posi-
tioning, feeding trajectories, foods, and individual and social dining
scenarios. To use wearable data to estimate bite timing, we propose
a supervised data-driven algorithm. In the following sections, we
describe our methodology for data collection, the architecture of
our learned model, and our deployment approach, followed by a
description of two evaluation studies involving both individuals
with and without impairments. The setup for all three studies are
shown in Fig. A1 and compared in table format in Table A1.
3.1  Phase 1: Data Collection Study
To collect a dataset of wearable signals for training a supervised
learning algorithm, we conducted a human study, referred to as
Phase 1, with 14 participants (7 M, 7 F) ranging in age from 19 to
60 (Mean = 26.07, SD = 10.16). We received approval from Carnegie
Mellon University’s Institutional Review Board. Demographic data
is presented in Appendix A.7.1.
As illustrated in Fig. A1, participants wear two wireless Inertial
Measurement Units (IMUs) mounted on glasses, two additional
wireless IMUs embedded in earbuds, and a commercially available
throat microphone. The IMU boards [1], shown in Fig. 2, are custom
designed and fabricated and are housed in 3D-printed enclosures
affixed to the glasses and in the 3D-printed earbuds. Participants sit
in a wheelchair with their movement restricted by two straps, simu-
lating the condition of someone with severe motor impairments as
suggested by an Occupational Therapist consultant. The Obi robot
is situated in front of the participant with an Intel Realsense D435i
RGBD camera mounted on the robot arm. A companion laptop
running ROS 1 Noetic is used to simultaneously collect RGB images
and depth images at 15 Hz, 3-axis accelerations and quaternions
from each of the four IMUs at 200 Hz, and audio from the throat
microphone at 44.1 kHz. Two push buttons are additionally con-
nected to the laptop and are used to control the Obi robot. Before
starting data collection, we kinesthetically move the robot to record
the feeding position directly in front of the user’s mouth. Next,
we introduce the participant to the system by having them eat 2
bites of food and to try rotating between the 4 bowls using the red
button, seen in Fig. 2. Information on the foods utilized is included
in Appendix A.6.
We structure our data collection as follows. The robot automati-
cally scoops food from the selected bowl and moves to a predefined
staging point about 15 inches from the participant’s mouth. Six
participants do a participant-controlled version of the study, while
the other eight participate in a Wizard of Oz (WoZ) version. For
the participant-controlled version, between the staging and feeding
points, the participants use a yellow button, which moves the robot
towards the mouth when it is pushed and held down. When the
button is released, the robot doesn’t move. For the Wizard of Oz
version, participants are told that the robot is fully autonomous,
and a researcher uses the yellow button to control the robot be-
tween the staging and feeding points. The researcher specifically
looks for cues from the user that caregivers often use, including
chewing, talking, and glancing at the robot. They follow a set of
guidelines we developed, provided in Appendix A.5, to decide when
to progress the robot and stop it.
We conduct both the Wizard of Oz and participant-controlled
versions of the study because each provides valuable bite timing
data for training our algorithms. The Wizard of Oz condition offers
more structured training data as the experimenter directly con-
trols the robot’s movements, ensuring consistent robot movements
across participants. This structure makes it easier for the model to
learn generalized patterns by minimizing variability. Additionally,
the Wizard of Oz condition enables us to collect data on interactions
with an ‘autonomous’ robot, including participants’ reactions to
occasional bite timing errors. However, structured data alone may
not capture the full range of nuanced user preferences in robot
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
Talking
Moving Head
Chewing
Mostly Still
IMUThroat Mic.
Example Wearable Signals
Concatenated Hand Picked Features
Predicted Time 
(s) Till Next 
Bite (ŷ)
User Selected 
Assertiveness 
Threshold (τ)
Assertiveness 
Thresholding
if ŷ > τ if ŷ <= τ 
Stop RobotProgress Robot
Throat Mic.IMU
Bite Timing Model
Figure 2: WAFFLE Deployment Pipeline. Features from 1 second windows of IMU and Throat Microphone data are inputted
into our bite timing machine learning model which outputs
ˆ
푦, the predicted time (s) until the next bite. We use a user selected
assertiveness threshold, 휏, to stop and progress the robot along the trajectory.
motion and bite timing, which is why participant-controlled data
is additionally collected. In both conditions, the researcher initiates
the next scooping action through a manual command entered on
the companion laptop once the participant has completed the bite.
For both participant-controlled and WoZ studies, for every par-
ticipant, we conduct both individual and social dining scenarios,
with the order counterbalanced for all participants. For individual
dining, the user has 6 minutes to eat using the robot without any
external interactions. For social dining, the user has 12 minutes to
eat using the robot while conversing with a researcher who sits in
front of them. More details on the social dining setup are located in
Appendix A.4. During the debriefing of the Wizard of Oz version
of the study, none of the participants reported suspicion that the
robot was being controlled by the researcher.
3.2  Bite Timing Algorithm
We introduce a regression model that predicts the number of sec-
onds until the next bite using data from a throat microphone and a
single IMU mounted on the left side of a glasses frame. As shown
in the raw data signals in Fig. 2, the IMU’s acceleration signals
and the throat microphone’s signals offer complementary insights
into head movements, chewing, and talking. The IMU effectively
captures head movements and chewing activity, while the throat
microphone excels at detecting vibrations from swallowing and
vocal cord activity during speech. To ensure the approach general-
izes across different robot platforms, user orientations, and feeding
trajectories, we intentionally exclude RGB camera data from the
Phase 1 study. In real-world settings, feeding robot end effectors
with cameras are often positioned above the plate or away from the
user to avoid obstructing social interactions. Even when oriented
toward the user, natural head movements can shift the face out of
view, and because the camera is mounted on the robot arm, facial
keypoints are heavily influenced by the robot’s own movement
rather than the participant’s behavior. As a result, camera-based
features are unreliable for capturing user intent. We also omit the
remaining three IMUs (right glasses, left/right earbud), as their
signals are highly similar to that of the left glasses IMU.
Our bite timing algorithm is visually shown in Fig. 2. For ev-
ery 1 second (s) window of 3-axis IMU accelerations and throat
microphone signal, we divide this into two 500ms windows and
extract hand-picked features. Using low-level windows with hand-
picked features has shown promise for activity recognition includ-
ing chewing detection in past works [3,33,41]. These features
are concatenated and inputted into a multi-layer perceptron. The
final layer directly outputs the predicted time (s),
ˆ
푦
, until the next
bite. The model is trained using ground truth labels derived from
the Phase 1 dataset, where each label represents the time from a
given sample to the timestamp at which the robot reaches the set
feeding position in front of the user’s mouth. We evaluate using
leave one subject out cross validation (LOSO-CV) and train the final
model for evaluation studies on data from all 14 participants. We
provide additional details on our bite timing model architecture in
Appendix A.2.
To deploy our trained model and enable reactive robot behavior,
we use a thresholding approach to convert the predicted time until
the next bite into a binary proceed/stop command for the robot.
If the predicted time (
ˆ
푦
) until the next bite is such that
ˆ
푦> 휏
, a
stop moving command is sent to the robot. Otherwise, if
ˆ
푦<= 휏
,
then a proceed moving command is sent to the robot. We define
the threshold value,휏, as the user-selected assertiveness threshold,
which determines how confidently the robot acts on its predic-
tions. Lower values make the robot behave more cautiously, while
higher values result in more assertive feeding actions. This thresh-
old incorporates user preferences and interpretability, inspired by
observations from our Phase 1 study where participants exhibited
different preferences for how assertively they fed themselves during
the participant-controlled version.
To quantify how well our bite timing model would perform in
deployment with thresholding, we use the ground truth 0 and 1
robot motion labels from the Phase 1 study, which were provided
by the participant for the participant-controlled studies and by the
researcher for the Wizard of Oz studies. We generate predictions
(in seconds) from our model and convert these to binary (0 and 1)
predictions using the threshold. We then calculate binary metrics
using LOSO-CV, evaluating only the participants who completed
the participant-controlled Phase 1 study. The binary classification
metrics we use are accuracy and the normalized Matthews Cor-
relation Coefficient (nMCC), where 0 indicates perfect negative
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
correlation, 0.5 represents no correlation, and 1 indicates perfect
positive correlation. We chose nMCC because it captures the qual-
ity of both true positive and true negative predictions which are
equally important in our context, as they represent the robot’s de-
cisions to reactively proceed or stop along the feeding trajectory.
These binary metrics do not reflect the appropriateness of the bite
timing itself, but instead serve as an indicator of how closely the
robot’s start and stop actions (as determined by thresholding) align
with the executed trajectories from the Phase 1 study.
We calculate the aforementioned binary metrics using a fixed
threshold of휏=6 seconds which produced the highest nMCC
and accuracy scores across all discrete threshold values from 4 to
8 seconds. These results are provided in Appendix A.8. We also
found a fixed threshold of휏=6 seconds worked best in practice
through testing among the research team and pilot studies. To show
the benefit of user-selected variable thresholds, we also calculate
binary metrics using the optimal threshold for each participant,
out of휏 ∈ {4,5,6,7,8}seconds, that leads to the highest nMCC
score. In a deployment, we assume that participants would be able
to choose this optimal threshold for themselves after getting fully
acclimated with the system. During deployment, we also transform
the assertiveness threshold (originally in units of seconds) into a
mapped assertiveness threshold. This new scale ranges from 1 (least
assertive) to 5 (most assertive).
3.3  Phase 2: Evaluation with Individuals
without Impairments
In order to directly compare our wearables method with bite timing
baselines, we conducted a comparison study, named Phase 2, with
individuals without impairments. This study was completed with 15
participants (6 M, 9 F) with ages ranging from 19-28 (Mean = 22.27,
SD = 3.1). We received approval from Carnegie Mellon University’s
Institutional Review Board. All demographic data is presented in
Appendix A.7.2.
The two baselines we used were Fixed Interval and Mouth Open.
In line with past work on bite timing [31], for the Fixed Inter-
val method, the robot feeds the participant every 45 seconds. The
Mouth Open method is the most commonly used trigger for bite
timing in robot-assisted feeding studies [6,28,38,39,43]. For the
Mouth Open baseline, after reaching the staging point, the robot
announces “Please open your mouth when you are ready to eat.”
The participant must then turn towards the Intel Realsense D435i
RGBD camera mounted on the robot’s arm and open their mouth
to indicate they are ready for the next bite. Once the robot detects
the user’s mouth is open, it proceeds automatically through the
entire feeding trajectory.
Similar to the Phase 1 study, participants sit in a wheelchair
with their movement restricted by two straps, simulating the con-
dition of someone with severe motor impairments. Participants are
outfitted with only a single wireless Inertial Measurement Units
(IMU) mounted on the left side of the glasses and the throat mi-
crophone. Additionally, we place the commercially available Obi
assistive feeding robot from DES
 ̄
IN LLC [26] to the side of the par-
ticipant, to highlight the ability of our algorithms to generalize to
any robot positioning and feeding trajectory. Additional details on
the foods used is included in the Appendix A.6. Similar to Phase 1,
we kinesthetically teach the robot the feeding position.
We begin with a practice session to familiarize participants with
the system and the three feeding methods. For the two baseline
methods, we explain their mechanisms and allow participants to try
each once. For the wearables method, participants complete three
practice trials to experience how specific cues including speaking,
chewing, and large head movements, pause the robot’s motion,
while minimal head movement allows it to continue along its tra-
jectory. To minimize participant confusion during the study and
due to the limited number of trials per method, we fix the mapped
assertiveness threshold at a value of 3, which based on quantitative
results presented in Section 4.1 and piloting, offers a balanced level
of performance for most participants.
There are two parts to this study: individual dining and social
dining. We counterbalance the order of these parts. For each part,
we conduct three consecutive trials for each method. The methods
and their relative order are blinded to the participant and coun-
terbalanced across participants. The relative order of the methods
stays consistent for both individual and social dining scenarios for
each participant to reduce confusion and minimize cognitive load.
The social dining scenario is conducted with a researcher as detailed
in Appendix A.4. After each method, the participant responds to
questions related to bite timing and multiple 7-point Likert items
related to distraction, feeling of control, robot understanding, ap-
propriateness of robot movement, seamlessness, mental workload,
physical workload, and natural conversation. After each part of
the two parts of the study, the participant blindly ranks the three
methods based on their preference. At the end of the study, the
methods are unblinded and the participant ranks the three methods
overall. Finally, they answer qualitative questions. All questions
and Likert items are included in Appendix A.3.
3.4  Phase 3: Evaluation with Individuals with
Motor Impairments
We conducted a final study, named Phase 3, with 2 individuals with
motor impairments in their homes. The two participants are re-
ferred to henceforth as I1 and I2. We received approval from Cornell
University’s Institutional Review Board. I1 is a 47-year-old male
with a C4–C6 Spinal Cord Injury, with limited head and neck mobil-
ity, requiring inside-mouth bite transfer. I2 is a 48-year-old female
with Multiple Sclerosis who prefers out of mouth bite transfer. I1
is fed banana, strawberry, and cantaloupe pieces while I2 is fed
banana and strawberry pieces. We use the FEAST system, which
consists of a Kinova 7DOF arm, with the same safety features as
described in Jenamani et al. [21]. Both participants have experi-
ence with the FEAST system with manual triggering for bite timing
in a past research study; I1 previously used a web interface and
nodding and I2 previously used the web interface [21]. To control
the computer cursor for the web interface, I1 used a mouse tracker
that follows a reflective dot on his nose while I2, with limited limb
mobility, used her left arm.
For this study, we only evaluate our Wearables method. The
FEAST robot automatically acquires the pieces of fruit and moves
to a staging point. From there, the robot receives stop and proceed
commands based on assertiveness thresholding on the predictions
from our bite timing model. We set a fixed outside-mouth bite
transfer distance, and the FEAST robot autonomously perceives
the participant’s mouth location and moves to that position. We
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
Table 1: Accuracy and nMCC after Thresholding using Optimal Thresholds for each Participant and a Fixed Threshold
IMU & Throat Mic.IMU onlyThroat Mic. onlyAlways Feed
Accuracy (Optimal Thresholds)0.700± 0.0900.680± 0.0710.532± 0.1370.396± 0.122
Accuracy (Fixed Threshold)0.668± 0.0660.633± 0.0690.523± 0.1210.396± 0.122
nMCC (Optimal Thresholds)0.674± 0.0880.655± 0.0530.576± 0.0650.500± 0.000
nMCC (Fixed Threshold)0.650± 0.0820.624± 0.0650.554± 0.1020.500± 0.000
Figure 3: Phase 2 participant responses to the question, “How was the bite timing of this method on average?” for both individual
and social dining scenarios. Data points are additionally provided in Table A9.
make a minor modification to the Wearables method by having the
robot commit to completing the remainder of the trajectory if it is
within 5 centimeters of the participant’s mouth. This change was
motivated by observations in our Phase 2 study, where participants
would open their mouths in anticipation of the robot finishing the
trajectory, inadvertently causing it to stop.
Similar to the Phase 2 study, we have a practice session for the
Wearables method. During this session, we allow participants to
test the various user selected assertiveness thresholds. I1 only tried
mapped assertiveness level of 1 (least assertive) and used this level
throughout the study. Meanwhile I2 tried 1, 3, and 5 and used 5 (most
assertive) throughout the study. We counterbalance the order of the
individual and the social dining sessions for the two participants.
For each of the sessions, the participants eat six consecutive bites.
Both participants answered similar quantitative and qualitative
questions to the Phase 2 Study, included in Appendix A.14.
4  Results and Discussion
All participant demographics, quantitative and qualitative responses,
and statistical testing results are included in the Appendix.
4.1  Model Performance
As detailed in Section 3.2, our bite timing regression model outputs
predictions of time until the next bite in seconds. Using LOSO-CV
on the Phase 1 data, the combined IMU and throat microphone
model achieves the lowest MAE of 2.83±0.33 s. The IMU-only
model performs slightly worse at 2.98±0.25 s, while the throat
microphone–only model reaches 3.16±0.27 s. In comparison, a
naive predictor using the mean of the training labels for each fold
yields 3.25±0.15 s. These metrics show that our model is able
to learn a general relationship between 1-second wearable data
windows consisting of motion, chewing, and talking signals and
the time until the next bite, and they also highlight the value of
combining sensor modalities over using a single sensing modality.
As described in Section 3.2, in order to deploy our method and
enable reactive robot behavior based on wearable data, we threshold
predictions from our bite-timing model. We calculate binary metrics
(nMCC and accuracy) using both a fixed assertiveness threshold,
휏=6 s, equivalent to a mapped assertiveness threshold of 3, and the
optimal threshold per user. As previously mentioned, bite timing
is a challenging problem and is largely subconscious, with mul-
tiple timings and robot motions that participants would accept.
These binary metrics should not be interpreted as an indication of
whether or not the bite timing was appropriate and instead be used
to provide a signal on how well the robot’s start and stop motions
after thresholding align with the executed trajectories in the Phase
1 study.
As seen in Table 1, our IMU & Throat Mic. method achieves the
best alignment performance of 0.700 accuracy and 0.674 nMCC us-
ing the optimal threshold per participant. This performance slightly
outperforms the IMU only method which achieves 0.68 accuracy
and 0.655 nMCC. We see significantly better alignment performance
than an Always Feed method which achieves 0.3957 accuracy and
0.5 nMCC. We also find that our combined IMU & Throat Mic.
algorithm outperforms both the IMU only and Throat Mic. only al-
gorithms using these binary metrics, further backing our proposed
approach of using the combination of the two modalities.
Our metrics additionally show the value of incorporating user-
selected thresholding. We find that using the optimal threshold for
each participant results in an increase in alignment performance
in comparison to the fixed threshold. Specifically, we see an in-
crease from 0.650 nMCC to 0.675 nMCC and from 0.668 accuracy
to 0.700 accuracy for the IMU & Throat Mic. algorithm. In addition
to these quantitative results, we find the user-selected threshold-
ing to improve performance of the system during pilot testing.
In Section 4.2.2, we additionally discuss how our Phase 3 results
demonstrate the usefulness of the assertiveness thresholds for users.
4.2  Bite Timing Appropriateness
We present results on bite timing appropriateness from our Phase
2 Study in Table 2 for the question “Would you consider the tim-
ing of the bites appropriate?”. In Fig. 3, we present participants’
responses to the question “How was the bite timing of this method
on average?”.
Table 2: Phase 2 Responses on Bite Timing Appropriateness
ContextFixed IntervalMouth OpenWearables
Individual8 (53%)15 (100%)15 (100%)
Social13 (87%)11 (73%)13 (87%)
Overall21 (70%)26 (87%)28 (93%)
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
4.2.1    Individual Dining.  As seen in Table 2, for individual dining,
we find that the Wearables method performs significantly better
than both baseline methods. All 15 Phase 2 participants rated the
timing of the Wearables method as appropriate, comparable to the
Mouth Open method, while only 8/15 participants (53%) rated the
Fixed Interval method as appropriate. In our Phase 3 study, both
participants rated the timing of the Wearables method as appropri-
ate, demonstrating the ability of our algorithm to generalize to both
another robotic system and individuals with motor impairments.
As shown in Fig. 3, for the Phase 2 study, the Wearables method
received 13 Right Time responses and only 2 Slightly Early re-
sponses. In contrast, the next best method, Mouth Open, received
only 9 Right Time responses. The Fixed Interval method received
no Right Time responses and was consistently rated as Slightly Late,
Late, or Very Late. Meanwhile, in Phase 3 studies, both individuals
with motor impairments selected “Right Time” for the Wearables
method. These results highlight the clear timing advantages of our
method in individual settings. By utilizing wearable signals, the
system is able to dynamically initiate feeding when chewing sub-
sides and to pause when chewing is detected, enabling bite timing
that aligns more closely with the user’s readiness. In contrast, the
Fixed Interval method performs worst, feeding every 45 seconds
regardless of user behavior. Even if the interval were shortened, it
would still lack responsiveness to varying chewing durations across
different foods. Interestingly, the Mouth Open method, despite be-
ing manually triggered, does not outperform Wearables. This is
likely due both to the inherent delay between a participant opening
their mouth and the robot completing its trajectory to deliver the
bite, as well as the need for participants to provide repetitive input
for each bite.
Qualitative feedback further supports the quantitative findings.
Several participants highlighted that the Wearables method aligned
naturally with their preferred eating pace. For instance, P2 said
“In terms of the individual portion, I liked this [Wearables] timing
the best because it didn’t force me to wait for another bite like the
other ones, it kind of naturally matches my pace, the other ones
felt a little slow or fast at times.” The two participants with motor
impairments also strongly endorsed this approach. I2 remarked,
“Yes, I like it...I didn’t have to think about it...The timing was great,
it was...I loved it really.”
4.2.2    Social Dining.  As seen in Table 2, from our Phase 2 data
for social dining, we find that the Wearables and Fixed Interval
methods perform similarly in terms of appropriateness with 13/15
(87%) of participants finding the methods appropriate. Mouth Open
performed the worst for social dining with only 11/15 (73%) par-
ticipants finding the method appropriate. In our Phase 3 study, for
social dining, both participants once again rated the timing of the
Wearables method as appropriate.
As shown in Fig. 3, responses exhibit greater variability across
all methods compared to individual dining, reflecting the increased
variability in social dining settings due to conversation. Both the
Wearables and Fixed Interval methods received 8 Right Time re-
sponses. However, the remaining Wearables responses were more
tightly clustered around Right Time, with only 2 rated as early and
1 as late, whereas Fixed Interval received 1 early and 3 late ratings.
Meanwhile, in our Phase 3 studies, I1 selected “Right Time” and I2
selected “Slightly Early” for the Wearables method.
Qualitative responses also reflect mixed preferences between the
Fixed Interval and Wearables methods. Some participants found
Fixed Interval disruptive, noting it brought the robot “at random
points during the conversation” (P15), while others valued it as
“easier to anticipate” (P3). For the Wearables method, some partici-
pants appreciated its adaptive nature, such as P2, who remarked,
“it would wait for me if I started chewing or talking after I signaled
that I was ready to eat. I didn’t have to control the conversation for
a pause around the time that the bite would be ready.” In contrast,
P8 felt the robot was “smothering me with food when I was hoping
to talk” (P8). These differing perspectives highlight the value of
incorporating the user-controlled assertiveness threshold. In our
Phase 3 study, where the 2 participants were allowed to select their
own thresholds, they chose values at opposite ends of the spectrum,
and both reported positive and enjoyable experiences. I1 said he
liked the method during social dining “because it just let me have a
conversation and eat at the same time” while I2 said it was “almost
seamless.”
4.3  Likert Items
For the Likert items described in Section 3.3, from the Phase 2
studies, we present the mean and standard deviation for each item
for individual and social dining in Fig. 4. We additionally present
results from statistical testing in the plot. We specifically use the
non-parametric Friedman test to assess overall differences among
the three methods for each item. Significant differences (푝< .05)
are found for all items except L4: Appropriate Movement in the so-
cial dining context. For items showing significant overall effects,
we conduct post-hoc Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for all pairwise
method comparisons, applying the conservative Bonferroni correc-
tion factor of 3. In the plot, we also include the data points for the
Wearables method from the Phase 3 study with I1 and I2.
4.3.1    Individual Dining.  As seen in Fig. 4, the Wearables method
received strong Likert ratings by both Phase 2 and Phase 3 par-
ticipants in the individual dining condition across all items, with
statistically higher ratings for L2: Feeling of Control, L3: Robot Un-
derstanding, L4: Appropriate Movement, L5: Seamlessness, and L7: No
Physical Workload compared to at least one baseline.
Wearables achieved similar Feeling of Control as Mouth Open
but with statistically lower Physical Workload. Both participants
with impairments gave a score of 7 (Strongly Agree) for L2: Feeling
of Control and score of 7 (Strongly Agree) and 6 (Agree) for L7: No
Physical Workload. This is notable, as prior studies report a trade-off
where autonomy often reduces user feeling of control [7,20]. In
contrast, our method balanced autonomy and user intent, reducing
workload while preserving control. P6 described the system as one
that “understood my natural body movements and I did not have to
exert additional effort.” P15 similarly emphasized efficiency, stating
it “required the least work on my part and had the best timing. I
didn’t have to open my mouth or wait unnecessarily long.” The
participants with impairments also felt similarly with I1 saying, “I
do like it. Cause I’m in control of the meal, when I was gonna take
the bite, when I wasn’t.”
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
Figure 4: Phase 2 and Phase 3 Individual and Social Dining Mean Likert Ratings with error bars representing the standard
deviation. Higher scores indicate more favorable outcomes for all items. Asterisks denote statistically significant pairwise
differences based on Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with Bonferroni correction (푝<0.05 = *,푝<0.01 = **,푝<0.001 = ***). Prior to
pairwise comparisons, a non-parametric Friedman test was used to confirm overall differences among the three methods for
each Likert item. Data is additionally included in Table A10- A15.
Wearables was statistically similar to Mouth Open on L3: Robot
Understanding and L4: Appropriate Movement, showing that partici-
pants perceived it as equally responsive despite relying on subtle
cues like chewing and motion rather than explicit mouth opening.
This performance underscores its ability to interpret nuanced be-
havior without any added workload. Lastly, Wearables was rated
more seamless than both baselines on L5: Seamlessness with statis-
tical significance, indicating a smoother, more intuitive experience.
This supports the idea that leveraging natural behaviors reduces
friction in human–robot interaction, enhancing comfort without
sacrificing control.
4.3.2Social Dining.  As seen in Fig. 4, the Wearables method again
received strong Likert ratings for all items for both individuals
with and without impairments. The Wearables method received the
highest ratings for L1: Not Distracted and L8: Natural Conversation,
statistically outperforming Mouth Open. This suggests the method
lets the robot feed without disrupting conversation, unlike explicit
cues such as mouth opening. P3 noted, “the actions for pausing
aligned with social cues where I’d rather not be disrupted.” In con-
trast, Fixed Interval showed no statistically significant difference on
L8: Natural Conversation compared to Mouth Open. We find similar,
strong responses for the Wearables method from the 2 individuals
with impairments, with I1 provided a response of 7 (Strongly Agree)
to L8: Natural Conversation while I2 responded with a 6 (Agree). I1
remarked, “It didn’t seem to take away from the conversation, so it
was just kind of part of that environment I guess?...It just seemed
to not interrupt the conversation.”
For Phase 2 participants, Wearables also matched Mouth Open on
L2: Feeling of Control and L3: Robot Understanding, while statistically
outperforming Fixed Interval. This indicates that even in dynamic
social contexts, the wearable sensing approach remains responsive
and aligned to user intent. Finally, Wearables was rated as more
seamless on L5: Seamlessness and yielded statistically lower L6:
Mental Workload and L7: Physical Workload than Mouth Open. P1
captured this sentiment succinctly: “It...recreated the way I usually
eat.” Notably, Wearables matched Fixed Interval, a fully autonomous
method, on workload while offering more adaptive behavior.
4.4  Ranking and Caregiver Similarity
As detailed in Section 3.3, Phase 2 participants blindly ranked the
methods after individual and social dining. As seen in Fig. 5, the
Wearables method was strongly preferred, receiving 87% of first-
place votes in the individual setting and 67% for social dining. In
unblinded overall rankings, it received the majority of first-place
votes (87%). Fixed Interval was generally the next most preferred,
while Mouth Open was least favored, particularly in the social
setting where participants noted it disrupted conversational flow.
We likely observe less first place votes for WAFFLE in the social
setting in comparison to the individual setting as the limited number
of trials and conversational variability made comparative evaluation
more challenging. Nevertheless, our results show that WAFFLE
provided users with statistically higher feeling of control, more
robot understanding, and more adaptability than the Fixed Interval
method in the social setting.
When asked which method most closely resembled how a care-
giver would decide when to feed, a majority (9/15) of Phase 2 par-
ticipants selected the Wearables method. In comparison, 3 chose
Mouth Open, 1 chose Fixed Interval, and 2 participants mentioned
both Wearables and Mouth Open. P5 summarized why the Wear-
ables method was the closest to a caregiver saying, “it wouldn’t
give the bite when I clearly didn’t want it, and it would adjust to
the environment to decide when to give the next bite, like a person
would.” We highlight the cues participants find most important dur-
ing feeding in Appendix A.10. These Phase 2 results were strongly
reinforced by the participants with motor impairments in the Phase
3 study. When asked if the Wearables method is similar to a care-
giver, I1 said, “I would say yes. Because when I wanted a bite, I got
it.” I2 expressed even stronger support, saying “way better, way
better than they would do it...way better just to be truthful.” She
elaborated that she often has to instruct caregivers directly, saying,
“watch for me chewing... if I’m still chewing, you don’t need to
pick the fork up,” and noted that some of them don’t pay atten-
tion. She elaborated saying “It drives me crazy when I’m talking to
somebody...and they go to give me a bite.” Lastly, she added that
caregivers can be easily distracted, saying“If we’re watching TV,
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
Figure 5: Phase 2 preference rankings for the three methods. The Wearables method received the most 1st-place rankings
across individual, social, and overall contexts.
forget about it. This is so much better, cause if we’re watching TV,
they don’t watch me as much as they watch the TV...So yeah this
is great.” These results suggest that the Wearables method aligned
with caregiver-like behavior and at times even exceeded caregiver
performance.
5  Adoption and Future Work
In this work, we presented WAFFLE, a wearable-based system for es-
timating bite timing in robot-assisted feeding. By leveraging natural
signals from wearables, WAFFLE enables intuitive and socially ap-
propriate interactions, responding in real time to passive user cues
such as chewing, speaking, and head movements. Across studies
with participants with and without motor impairments, WAFFLE
consistently outperformed baselines in feeling of control, robot un-
derstanding, workload, and preference, supporting our hypothesis
that robots can achieve unobtrusive and generalizable bite timing
by reacting to natural cues. The method also generalized effectively
across many participants, robot platforms, trajectories, foods, and
dining scenarios, underscoring its robustness and adaptability. In
our Phase 3 study, we found this generalization extended to unseen,
real-world contexts; as examples, I1 successfully used the system
while watching TV at home during individual dining, and the robot
appropriately paused when I2 sneezed during the study.
These results indicate strong likelihood of adoption of our inter-
face by users in future commercial robotic feeding systems. This is
further reinforced by the positive reception from participants with
motor impairments, who had prior experience using feeding robots
with web interfaces, and reported that our system was similar to
or better than their human caregivers. To further assess poten-
tial adoption, we qualitatively evaluated the comfort of the two
wearable devices, as wearability plays a crucial role in sustained
use. We found that the vast majority of participants considered
both the IMU-equipped glasses and the throat microphone com-
fortable to wear during dining, with additional details provided in
Appendix A.9.
Given this promising outlook, it is worth noting that wearable
sensing with IMUs and throat microphones is increasingly prac-
tical for real-world deployment. IMUs are already integrated into
commercially available smartglasses and throat microphones cur-
rently have utility as general-purpose microphones. In terms of
robot-assisted feeding specifically, these wearables could also offer
multiple use cases beyond bite timing, such as tracking food intake
or sensing spasms or choking. The wearables are privacy preserv-
ing and the throat microphone does not pick up ambient speech or
sounds, allowing for reliable operation in noisy environments. The
wearables are unobtrusive, further supporting adoption in daily life.
These insights are in line with past work that has shown that wear-
able interfaces offer key benefits over conventional interfaces for
caregiving robots, enabling intuitive, accessible, and unobtrusive
control [34–36,51]. We find comparable advantages in our study,
with the proposed Wearables method outperforming the baselines
that are more disruptive because they rely on screens, assistive
input devices, or require the robot to approach from the front or
the user to face the robot each time they want a bite. In contrast,
WAFFLE reduces disruption and supports natural interaction in
both individual and social dining situations.
Future work should include more testing with individuals with
impairments, particularly through longitudinal studies in diverse
dining environments to reveal long-term trends in usage. Another
promising direction is to incorporate additional cues identified by
participants, such as eye gaze.
References
[1]Anthony Wertz. [n. d.]. SML Posey Motion Sensors GitHub Organization. https:
//github.com/SML-Posey.  Accessed: 2025-05-08.
[2]
Cristian Barrué, Alejandro Suárez, Marco Inzitari, Aida Ribera, and Guillem
Alenyà. 2024. NYAM: The Role of Configurable Engagement Strategies in Robotic-
Assisted Feeding. In Companion of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Human-Robot Interaction. 228–232.
[3]Abdelkareem Bedri, Diana Li, Rushil Khurana, Kunal Bhuwalka, and Mayank
Goel. 2020. Fitbyte: Automatic diet monitoring in unconstrained situations using
multimodal sensing on eyeglasses. In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–12.
[4]Suneel Belkhale, Ethan K Gordon, Yuxiao Chen, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Tapo-
mayukh Bhattacharjee, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2022. Balancing efficiency and comfort
in robot-assisted bite transfer. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 4757–4763.
[5]Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Maria E Cabrera, Anat Caspi, Maya Cakmak, and
Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2019. A community-centered design framework for robot-
assisted feeding systems. In Proceedings of the 21st International ACM SIGACCESS
Conference on Computers and Accessibility. 482–494.
[6]
Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Ethan K Gordon, Rosario Scalise, Maria E Cabrera,
Anat Caspi, Maya Cakmak, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2020. Is more autonomy
always better? exploring preferences of users with mobility impairments in robot-
assisted feeding. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE international conference on
human-robot interaction. 181–190.
[7]Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Ethan K. Gordon, Rosario Scalise, Maria E. Cabrera,
Anat Caspi, Maya Cakmak, and Siddhartha S. Srinivasa. 2020. Is More Autonomy
Always Better?: Exploring Preferences of Users with Mobility Impairments
in Robot-assisted Feeding. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM/IEEE International
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. ACM, Cambridge United Kingdom, 181–
190.  doi:10.1145/3319502.3374818
[8]Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Gilwoo Lee, Hanjun Song, and Siddhartha S Srini-
vasa. 2019. Towards robotic feeding: Role of haptics in fork-based food manipu-
lation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 4, 2 (2019), 1485–1492.
[9]Peter F Edemekong, Deb Bomgaars, Sukesh Sukumaran, and Shoshana B Levy.
2019. Activities of daily living. (2019).
[10]Ryan Feng, Youngsun Kim, Gilwoo Lee, Ethan K Gordon, Matt Schmittle, Shivaum
Kumar, Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2019.  Robot-
assisted feeding: Generalizing skewering strategies across food items on a plate.
In The International Symposium of Robotics Research. Springer, 427–442.
[11]Daniel  Gallenberger,  Tapomayukh  Bhattacharjee,  Youngsun  Kim,  and  Sid-
dhartha S Srinivasa. 2019.   Transfer depends on acquisition: Analyzing ma-
nipulation strategies for robotic feeding. In 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 267–276.
[12]Ethan K Gordon, Rajat Kumar Jenamani, Amal Nanavati, Ziang Liu, Daniel
Stabile, Xilai Dai, Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Tyler Schrenk, Jonathan Ko, Haya
Bolotski, et al.2024.  An adaptable, safe, and portable robot-assisted feeding
system. In Companion of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
Robot Interaction. 74–76.
[13]Ethan K Gordon, Xiang Meng, Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Matt Barnes, and
Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2020. Adaptive robot-assisted feeding: An online learning
framework for acquiring previously unseen food items. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 9659–9666.
[14]Ethan Kroll Gordon, Amal Nanavati, Ramya Challa, Bernie Hao Zhu, Taylor
Annette Kessler Faulkner, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. 2023.   Towards general
single-utensil food acquisition with human-informed actions. In Conference on
Robot Learning. PMLR, 2414–2428.
[15]Jajack Heikenfeld, Andrew Jajack, Jim Rogers, Philipp Gutruf, Lei Tian, Tingrui
Pan, Ruya Li, Michelle Khine, Jintae Kim, and Juanhong Wang. 2018. Wearable
sensors: modalities, challenges, and prospects. Lab on a Chip 18, 2 (2018), 217–
248.
[16]Halli Heimbuch, Yeong Rhee, Marty Douglas, Kirsten Juhl, Kelly Knoll, Sherri
Stastny, and Ryan McGrath. 2023. Prevalence and Trends of Basic Activities of
Daily Living Limitations in Middle-Aged and Older Adults in the United States.
Epidemiologia 4, 4 (2023), 483–491.
[17]
Hiroki Higa, Kei Kurisu, and Hideyuki Uehara. 2014. A vision-based assistive
robotic arm for people with severe disabilities. Transactions on Machine Learning
and Artificial Intelligence 2, 4 (2014), 12–23.
[18]Delwar Hossain, Tonmoy Ghosh, and Edward Sazonov. 2020. Automatic count
of bites and chews from videos of eating episodes. Ieee Access 8 (2020), 101934–
101945.
[19]Catrine Jacobsson, Karin Axelsson, Per Olov Österlind, and Astrid Norberg. 2000.
How people with stroke and healthy older people experience the eating process.
Journal of Clinical Nursing (Wiley-Blackwell) 9, 2 (2000).
[20]
Shervin Javdani, Henny Admoni, Stefania Pellegrinelli, Siddhartha S. Srinivasa,
and J. Andrew Bagnell. 2018. Shared autonomy via hindsight optimization for
teleoperation and teaming. The International Journal of Robotics Research 37, 7
(June 2018), 717–742.  doi:10.1177/0278364918776060
[21]Rajat Kumar Jenamani, Tom Silver, Ben Dodson, Shiqin Tong, Anthony Song,
Yuting Yang, Ziang Liu, Benjamin Howe, Aimee Whitneck, and Tapomayukh
Bhattacharjee. 2025. FEAST: A Flexible Mealtime-Assistance System Towards
In-the-Wild Personalization. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS).
[22]
Rajat  Kumar  Jenamani,  Daniel  Stabile,  Ziang  Liu,  Abrar  Anwar,  Katherine
Dimitropoulou, and Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee. 2024.   Feel the Bite: Robot-
Assisted Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer using Robust Mouth Perception and Physical
Interaction-Aware Control. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. 313–322.
[23]Rajat Kumar Jenamani, Priya Sundaresan, Maram Sakr, Tapomayukh Bhattachar-
jee, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2024.  FLAIR: Feeding via Long-horizon AcquIsition of
Realistic dishes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.07561 (2024).
[24]Maya N Keely, Heramb Nemlekar, and Dylan P Losey. 2024. Kiri-Spoon: A soft
shape-changing utensil for robot-assisted feeding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05784
(2024).
[25]Rui Liu, Amisha Bhaskar, and Pratap Tokekar. 2024. Adaptive visual imitation
learning for robotic assisted feeding across varied bowl configurations and food
types. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12891 (2024).
[26]   DES
 ̄
IN LLC. 2024. Obi Robot.  http://meetobi.com
[27]
Rishabh Madan, Rajat Kumar Jenamani, Vy Thuy Nguyen, Ahmed Moustafa,
Xuefeng Hu, Katherine Dimitropoulou, and Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee. 2022.
Sparcs: Structuring physically assistive robotics for caregiving with stakeholders-
in-the-loop. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE, 641–648.
[28]Amal Nanavati, Patricia Alves-Oliveira, Tyler Schrenk, Ethan K Gordon, Maya
Cakmak, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2023. Design principles for robot-assisted
feeding in social contexts. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. 24–33.
[29]Amal Nanavati, Ethan K Gordon, Taylor A Kessler Faulkner, Yuxin Ray Song,
Jonathan Ko, Tyler Schrenk, Vy Nguyen, Bernie Hao Zhu, Haya Bolotski, Atharva
Kashyap, et al.2025. Lessons Learned from Designing and Evaluating a Robot-
Assisted Feeding System for Out-of-Lab Use. In 2025 20th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 696–707.
[30]
Amal Nanavati, Vinitha Ranganeni, and Maya Cakmak. 2023.  Physically As-
sistive Robots: A Systematic Review of Mobile and Manipulator Robots That
Physically Assist People with Disabilities. Annual Review of Control, Robotics,
and Autonomous Systems 7 (2023).
[31]Jan Ondras, Abrar Anwar, Tong Wu, Fanjun Bu, Malte Jung, Jorge Jose Ortiz,
and Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee. 2022. Human-robot commensality: Bite timing
prediction for robot-assisted feeding in groups. In 6th Annual Conference on
Robot Learning.
[32]Akhil Padmanabha, Sonal Choudhary, Carmel Majidi, and Zackory Erickson.
2023. A multimodal sensing ring for quantification of scratch intensity. Commu-
nications Medicine 3, 1 (2023), 115.
[33]Akhil Padmanabha, Saravanan Govindarajan, Hwanmun Kim, Sergio Ortiz, Rahul
Rajan, Doruk Senkal, and Sneha Kadetotad. 2025. EgoCHARM: Resource-Efficient
Hierarchical Activity Recognition using an Egocentric IMU Sensor. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.17735 (2025).
[34]Akhil Padmanabha, Janavi Gupta, Chen Chen, Jehan Yang, Vy Nguyen, Douglas J
Weber, Carmel Majidi, and Zackory Erickson. 2024. Independence in the Home:
A Wearable Interface for a Person with Quadriplegia to Teleoperate a Mobile
Manipulator. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Human-Robot Interaction. 542–551.
[35]Akhil Padmanabha, Carmel Majidi, and Zackory Erickson. 2025. Towards Wear-
able Interfaces for Robotic Caregiving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05343 (2025).
[36]
Akhil Padmanabha, Qin Wang, Daphne Han, Jashkumar Diyora, Kriti Kacker,
Hamza Khalid, Liang-Jung Chen, Carmel Majidi, and Zackory Erickson. 2023.
HAT: Head-Worn Assistive Teleoperation of Mobile Manipulators. In 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 12542–12548.
[37]Akhil Padmanabha, Jessie Yuan, Janavi Gupta, Zulekha Karachiwalla, Carmel Ma-
jidi, Henny Admoni, and Zackory Erickson. 2024. Voicepilot: Harnessing LLMs as
speech interfaces for physically assistive robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04066
(2024).
[38]Daehyung Park, Yuuna Hoshi, Harshal P Mahajan, Ho Keun Kim, Zackory
Erickson, Wendy A Rogers, and Charles C Kemp. 2020.  Active robot-assisted
feeding with a general-purpose mobile manipulator: Design, evaluation, and
lessons learned. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 124 (2020), 103344.
[39]Chamika Janith Perera, Thilina Dulantha Lalitharatne, and Kazuo Kiguchi. 2017.
EEG-controlled meal assistance robot with camera-based automatic mouth posi-
tion tracking and mouth open detection. In 2017 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation (ICRA). IEEE, 1760–1765.
[40]Temiloluwa Prioleau, Elliot Moore, and Maysam Ghovanloo. 2017. Unobtrusive
and wearable systems for automatic dietary monitoring. IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering 64, 9 (2017), 2075–2089.
[41]Eric Rosen and Doruk Senkal. 2022.   CHARM: A hierarchical deep learning
model for classification of complex human activities using motion sensors. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.07806 (2022).
[42]Edward Sazonov, Stephanie Schuckers, Paulo Lopez-Meyer, Oleksandr Makeyev,
Nadezhda Sazonova, Edward L Melanson, and Michael Neuman. 2008.  Non-
invasive monitoring of chewing and swallowing for objective quantification of
ingestive behavior. Physiological measurement 29, 5 (2008), 525.
[43]Sebastian Schröer, Ingo Killmann, Barbara Frank, Martin Völker, Lukas Fiederer,
Tonio Ball, and Wolfram Burgard. 2015.  An autonomous robotic assistant for
drinking. In 2015 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 6482–6487.
[44]
Lorenzo Shaikewitz, Yilin Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Jennifer Grannen, Priya Sun-
daresan, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2023. In-mouth robotic bite transfer with visual and
haptic sensing. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 9885–9895.
[45]Samantha E Shune. 2020. An altered eating experience: Attitudes toward feeding
assistance among younger and older adults. Rehabilitation Nursing Journal 45, 2
(2020), 97–105.
[46]Priya Sundaresan, Suneel Belkhale, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2022.  Learning visuo-
haptic skewering strategies for robot-assisted feeding. In 6th Annual Conference
on Robot Learning.
[47]Priya Sundaresan, Jiajun Wu, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2023.   Learning Sequential
Acquisition Policies for Robot-Assisted Feeding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05197
(2023).
[48]
Danielle M Taylor. 2018. Americans with disabilities: 2014. US Census Bureau
(2018), 1–32.
[49]Michele Tufano, Marlou Lasschuijt, Aneesh Chauhan, Edith JM Feskens, and
Guido Camps. 2022. Capturing eating behavior from video analysis: A systematic
review. Nutrients 14, 22 (2022), 4847.
[50]Tri Vu, Feng Lin, Nabil Alshurafa, and Wenyao Xu. 2017. Wearable food intake
monitoring technologies: A comprehensive review. Computers 6, 1 (2017), 4.
[51]Jehan Yang, Kent Shibata, Douglas Weber, and Zackory Erickson. 2023. High-
density Electromyography for Effective Gesture-based Control of Physically
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
Assistive Mobile Manipulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07745 (2023).
[52]Ali K Yetisen, Juan Leonardo Martinez-Hurtado, Barış Ünal, Ali Khademhosseini,
and Haider Butt. 2018. Wearables in medicine. Advanced Materials 30, 33 (2018),
1706910.
[53]Jessie Yuan, Janavi Gupta, Akhil Padmanabha, Zulekha Karachiwalla, Carmel
Majidi, Henny Admoni, and Zackory Erickson. 2024.  Towards an llm-based
speech interface for robot-assisted feeding. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 37th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology. 1–4.
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
A  Appendices
A.1  Devices
For the IMUs, we use open-sourced, custom-built printed circuit
boards [1] consisting of the CEVA Technologies BNO086 IMU. The
IMU boards are wireless and communicate over Bluetooth with
a hub (Nordic Semiconductor NRF5340-DK) which forwards IMU
readings over wired serial communication to the laptop. For the
throat microphone, we use the Lsgoodcare 3.5MM Plug Adjustable
Throat Microphone.
A.2  Modeling Additional Details
We use a regression model to estimate the time until the next bite
rather than directly predicting binary proceed/stop commands for
two key reasons. First, this approach yields a more generalizable
model that can support various deployment strategies, such as
converting predictions into binary commands or using them directly
to control the number of seconds the robot should pause until
progressing through the feeding trajectory. Second, participant-
issued progress/stop commands were often noisy and inconsistent,
even within the same individual, making it difficult for the model
to learn associations between wearable signals and robot motion.
For example, a participant might advance the robot mid-chew in
one trial but wait until finishing chewing in another which are both
valid behaviors for appropriate bite timing.
Our data and model pipeline is explained with additional detail
as follows. First, 1s windows of 3-axis IMU accelerations and throat
microphone data are resampled using 1-D interpolation to 200 Hz
and 100 Hz respectively. We specifically select short 1s windows
as this minimizes latency and allows our feeding robot to be very
reactive to human behavior and cues. Next, we split each 1s sample
into two 500 ms low-level windows. For each low-level window, for
each of the 3 acceleration axes of the IMU and the throat microphone
signal, we extract 6 hand-picked features from the acceleration:
maximum, minimum, mean, standard deviation, range, and root
mean square (RMS). We concatenate the features from both sensing
modalities and normalize them to zero mean and unit variance.
In total, there are 48 features (2 low level windows×4 axes×
6 features per axis). The concatenated, normalized features,푓 ∈
R
48
are inputted to our bite timing ML model, which is a multi-
layer perceptron with three fully connected layers of sizes (128,
64, and 1). ReLU activations and dropout with a probability of
0.1 are applied after the first and second layers. The final layer
directly outputs the predicted time (s),
ˆ
푦, until the next bite. We
train the model using ground truth labels of time until the next
bite, collected from our human study. We observe that human
behavior more than 10s before a bite, such as chewing, talking,
or head movements, is similar to behavior around the 10 second
mark. To limit the influence of these distant and less informative
events during model training, we cap all ground truth labels at
10s. This reduces influence on the loss from larger labels that will
not improve bite timing prediction. The model is trained using
mean absolute error (MAE) loss and the Adam optimizer for 100
epochs with a learning rate of 0.0001 and batch size of 128. Our bite
timing model generates predictions at 2 Hz. The predictions are
thresholded using the user selected assertiveness threshold and the
binary progress/stop command is sent to the robot at 2 Hz.
A.3  Study Setup Additional Details
We visually show the study setup for the three phases in Fig. A1
and directly compare them in Table A1.
The following questions and Likert items were asked to partici-
pants after testing each method in the Phase 2 study:
•Would you consider the timing of the bites appropriate?
(Yes/No)
•
How was the bite timing of this method on average? (Very
Early, Early, Slightly Early, Right Time, Slightly Late, Late,
Very Late)
•  L1: I was not distracted by this bite timing method.
•  L2: I felt in control of the robot with this method.
•  L3: The robot understands when I want a bite.
•  L4: The robot moved at the appropriate moments.
•  L5: This bite timing method is seamless.
•  L6: This bite timing method required no mental workload.
•
L7: This bite timing method required no physical workload.
•L8: For social dining only: The robot allowed me to have
natural conversation.
At the end of the Phase 2 study, the participants answer the
following qualitative questions:
•Why did you prefer your highest ranked method? Please
elaborate and compare the methods for both the individual
and social settings.
•Which methods did you feel in control while using? Why
or why not?
•
Which method had the most appropriate bite timing? Elabo-
rate on why it had the most appropriate timing and compare
it to the other methods.
•What cues do you think a caregiver or you use to know
when to feed a care recipient or yourself a bite?
•Which method was closest to how a caregiver or you would
perform this task? Please elaborate on why.
•Were the glasses comfortable to wear while eating? If not,
please explain.
•Was the throat microphone comfortable to wear while eat-
ing? If not, please explain.
A.4  Social Dining Conversation Topics
Similar to Ondras et al. [31], we utilize the following conversation
starters for the social dining portion of the study:
•  Who is your favorite singer and why?
•  What are you studying?
•  What is your favorite food and why?
•  What is your favorite color and why?
•  Do you give back or volunteer with any organizations?
•  What are your favorite writers and books?
•  Do you have any pets and if so, what are they?
•  What sports do you play or watch and why?
•  What is your favorite movie and why?
•  Who is your favorite actor and why?
•
Which languages do you speak and which ones do you
want to learn?
•  What was your favorite vacation?
•  What are your hobbies?
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
Figure A1: Study Setup for the Three Phases. A. Phase 1 Study Setup. In this study, we collect bite timing data from 14 participants
with no motor impairments with the Obi robot feeding from the front of the participant. B. Phase 2 Study Setup. In this study,
we compare our wearables approach, WAFFLE, to two baselines with 15 participants without motor impairments with the Obi
robot feeding from the side of the participant. C. Phase 3 Study Setup. In this study, we evaluate our wearables approach with 2
participants with motor impairments with the FEAST robot [21] feeding from the front of the participant.
Table A1: Overview of the Three Human Studies
Phase 1Phase 2Phase 3
Type of StudyData CollectionEvaluationEvaluation
Number of Participants14152
DemographicNo Motor ImpairmentsNo Motor ImpairmentsMotor Impairments
Robot TypeObi [26]Obi [26]FEAST [21]
Robot PositioningFrontSideSide
Feeding TrajectoryFrontSideFront
FoodsAssortedAssortedAssorted Fruits
SettingsIndividual & SocialIndividual & SocialIndividual & Social
Bite Timing MethodsParticipant Controlled & WoZWearables & 2 BaselinesWearables
To foster a more natural conversation, we encourage participants
to ask the researcher questions in return. Additionally, we have the
researcher eat food to simulate a shared meal experience.
A.5  Wizard of Oz Guidelines
To mitigate participant suspicion, the researcher uses a video feed
from the RealSense camera displayed on the companion robot to
get a clear view of the participant’s face during data collection.
These guidelines are listed in order of priority as sometimes cues
can conflict; for example, the person may still be chewing while
also glancing at the robot to indicate they want another bite.
A.5.1    Individual.  Listed in order of priority, so in the case of a
conflict, higher ones should be adhered to before lower ones:
(1)
Move forward: Participant starts glancing toward the robot
or the camera
(2)
Stop: Participant’s body language or other forms of com-
munication indicate they do not want the bite (e.g., leaning
backwards, turning their head away from the spoon, etc.)
(3)  Move forward: Participant is not chewing
(4)Move forward: Participant is giving indication that they are
almost done chewing, such as:
•
Visibly or audibly chewing significantly more lightly
than previously
•  Licking their mouth area
•  Visibly or audibly swallowing
(5)  Stop: Participant is chewing
A.5.2Social.  Listed in order of priority, so in the case of a conflict,
higher ones should be adhered to before lower ones:
(1)
Stop: Participant’s body language or other forms of com-
munication indicate they do not want the bite (e.g., leaning
backwards, turning their head away from the spoon, etc.)
(2)Move forward: Participant is giving indication that they are
almost done talking, such as:
•  Posing a question to the dining partner
•  Trailing off
(3)  Stop: Participant is talking
(4)Stop: Dining partner is giving indication that they are al-
most done talking, such as:
•  Posing a question to the participant
•  Trailing off
(5)  Move forward: Dining partner is talking
(6)  Move forward: Participant is not chewing
(7)Move forward: Participant is giving indication that they are
almost done chewing, such as:
•Visibly or audibly chewing significantly more lightly
than previously
•  Licking their mouth area
•  Visibly or audibly swallowing
(8)  Stop: Participant is chewing
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
A.6  Food Options
For Phase 1 studies, we allow participants to pick a soft, medium,
and hard food and an additional wildcard food from any of the
following 3 categories to fill the 4 bowls of the Obi robot:
•  Soft: yogurt, applesauce, tomato soup
•  Medium: rice, mac and cheese, corn, mashed potatoes
•  Hard: pretzels, cheerios, granola, goldfish
For Phase 2 studies, we all participants to pick 2 medium and
2 hard foods. We exclude soft foods from this study as there is
increased risk of food spillage due to feeding from the side. The
foods chosen by participants in Phase 1 and Phase 2 are provided
in Table A2 and Table A3. For both Phase 1 and Phase 2 studies,
a small display monitor is placed on the table in front of the user
to indicate which bowl the robot will be scooping from next. The
fruits chosen by participants in Phase 3 are provided in the main
text.
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
Table A2: Phase 1 Food Selections
Participant  Hard Food   Medium Food    Soft FoodWildcard
1pretzelsmac and cheeseapplesaucegranola
2pretzelsriceyogurtcheerios
3pretzelsriceapplesaucegranola
4granolamashed potatoesyogurtgoldfish
5goldfishriceapplesaucemac and cheese
6cheeriosriceyogurtmac and cheese
7granolamashed potatoesyogurtpretzels
8granolamac and cheesetomato soupmashed potatoes
9cheerioscornapplesaucegranola
10goldfishcornyogurttomato soup
11granolamashed potatoesyogurtapplesauce
12cheeriosmashed potatoesyogurtpretzels
13goldfishcornyogurtpretzels
14pretzelsriceapplesaucegranola
Table A3: Phase 2 Food Selections
Participant  Hard Food   Medium Food   Hard Food   Medium Food
1cheeriosricegranolamac and cheese
2granolamashed potatoescheeriosmac and cheese
3cheeriosmac and cheesegranolarice
4pretzelsmac and cheesecheeriosmashed potatoes
5pretzelsmashed potatoesgranolamac and cheese
6cheeriosmashed potatoesgoldfishmac and cheese
7pretzelsricegranolamashed potatoes
8goldfishmashed potatoescheeriosmac and cheese
9goldfishricepretzelsmac and cheese
10cheeriosmashed potatoespretzelsrice
11pretzelsricegranolamac and cheese
12granolaricegoldfishmashed potatoes
13goldfishmashed potatoescheeriosmac and cheese
14goldfishmashed potatoescheeriosmac and cheese
15goldfishricepretzelsmashed potatoes
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
A.7  Participant Demographics
A.7.1    Phase 1.  In addition to the demographics detailed in the
main text, participants were asked how much experience they have
with controlling a robot and their level of hunger. Three additional
participants were excluded, two because they took very few bites
as they were not hungry during the session, and one due to sensor
connection issues. We visually show participant demographics from
our Phase 1 studies in Fig A2.
A.7.2Phase 2.  Similar to the Phase 1 study, participants were also
asked how much experience they have with controlling a robot and
their level of hunger. We visually show participant demographics
from our Phase 2 studies in Fig A3.
A.7.3Phase 3.  The majority of Phase 3 demographics information
is presented in the main text in Section 3.4. Additionally, both
participants with motor impairments indicated their level of hunger
was “Moderately Hungry”.
A.8Metrics using Different Fixed Assertiveness
Thresholds
We include the accuracy and nMCC metrics for fixed assertiveness
threshold values from 4 seconds to 8 seconds in Table A4. We find
that the threshold of 6 seconds outperforms all other threshold
values.
A.9  Wearability
Participant responses on wearability of the two devices from the
Phase 2 and Phase 3 studies are provided in Appendix A.13 and A.14.
We find that the vast majority of participants considered both the
IMU-equipped glasses and the throat microphone comfortable to
wear. 6/15 participants initially found the throat microphone uncom-
fortable or distracting to wear, but all clarified, without prompting,
that they stopped noticing it once the study began. One participant,
however, mentioned that they would not want to wear it for an
extended period. For users who may find the throat microphone un-
desirable, we believe IMU-only models could provide a reasonable
alternative based on our bite timing results in Section 4.1, though
further testing is needed to confirm this.
From the Phase 3 studies, we find that both participants with
motor impairments reported that the IMU-equipped glasses and
throat microphone were generally comfortable to wear across both
individual and social dining scenarios. Both noted that any initial
awareness of the devices diminished over time, with I2 mentioning
that while the throat microphone initially felt “awkward” or “a little
snug,” it was not uncomfortable. Similarly, both participants de-
scribed the IMU on the glasses as unobtrusive, with I2 commenting
that they “forgot it was there” after the start of the session. These
findings align closely with our Phase 2 results, suggesting that both
sensing modalities are well-accepted even in real-world, in-home
settings.
A.10  Feeding Cues
At the end of the Phase 2 and 3 studies, we additionally gauged
participants on what cues a caregiver or they themselves would
use to decide when to deliver a bite of food, and which bite timing
method best reflected that behavior. When describing the cues they
would rely on, 8 of the Phase 2 participants mentioned chewing or
stopping chewing and 7 participants mentioned explicit gestures
such as opening the mouth, head turning, or nodding. Other cues
included talking or stopping talking (6 participants), swallowing (3
participants), looking at the food or caregiver (2 participants), and
being still (1 participant).
From the Phase 3 studies, both participants with motor impair-
ments similarly emphasized chewing status as an important cue for
appropriate bite timing. I1 explained that a caregiver would likely
rely on “when I was done chewing” or “if I turn toward them.” In
social dining, I1 added that pauses in activity could also serve as
cues: “if I stop talking, maybe they’re like ‘oh, he wants a bite’.”
I2 reported giving similar guidance to caregivers: “watch for me
chewing... if I’m still chewing, you don’t need to pick the fork up.”
They also described frustration when bites were offered too soon
and stressed that feeding should not interrupt conversation: “It
drives me crazy when I’m talking... and they go to give me a bite.”
Finally, they noted that caregivers can sometimes miss cues: “If
we’re watching TV... they don’t watch me as much as they watch
the TV... so this is better.”
A.11  Statistical Testing
A.11.1    Friedman Test.  P-values and Friedman statistics are pro-
vided for individual and social dining in Table A5 and Table A6
respectively.
Table A5: Friedman Test Results for Individual Dining
Likert ItemFriedman Statisticp-value
L17.5416670.023033
L221.1666670.000025
L324.1111110.000006
L418.2857140.000107
L516.4727270.000265
L67.4090910.024611
L78.7111110.012835
Table A6: Friedman Test Results for Social Dining
Likert ItemFriedman Statisticp-value
L114.5090910.000707
L213.3777780.001245
L310.6190480.004944
L42.0392160.360736
L511.2307690.003641
L69.5294120.008525
L721.1153850.000026
L814.3333330.000772
A.11.2Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test.  Post hoc results using the Wilcoxon
signed-rank tests are provided for individual and social dining in
Table A7 and Table A8 respectively.
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
Not at all hungry
Slightly hungry
Moderately hungry
Very hungry
Extremely hungry
0
2
4
6
8
1 (No Experience)
234
5 (Expert User)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Female
7
Male
7
Asian
10
White
4
Mean
SD
Min
Max
Statistic
26.07
10.16
19
60
Value
Number of Participants
Number of Participants
GenderEthnicityAgeLevel of HungerExperience with Robots
Figure A2: Phase 1 (n=14) Demographics
Not at all hungry
Slightly hungry
Moderately hungry
Very hungry
Extremely hungry
0
2
4
6
8
10
1 (No Experience)
234
5 (Expert User)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Female
9
Male
6
Asian
11
White
2
Hispanic
2
Mean
SD
Min
Max
Statistic
22.27
3.1
19
28
Value
Number of Participants
Number of Participants
GenderEthnicityAgeLevel of HungerExperience with Robots
Figure A3: Phase 2 (n=15) Demographics
Table A4: Accuracy and nMCC for Fixed Assertiveness Threshold Values from 4s to 8s
Threshold Value4s5s6s7s8s
Accuracy0.608± 0.146  0.627± 0.115  0.668± 0.066  0.552± 0.098  0.471± 0.144
nMCC0.566± 0.056  0.614± 0.046  0.650± 0.082  0.589± 0.053  0.554± 0.064
Table A7: Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test Results for Individual Dining
Likert ItemFixed Interval - Mouth OpenFixed Interval - WearablesMouth Open - Wearables
L11.6661920.1427500.540442
L20.0047090.0027052.017295
L30.0024780.0001830.572961
L40.0139560.0040471.252239
L50.0585300.0047600.036035
L60.3222142.3938760.073205
L70.0212311.8539100.017029
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
Table A8: Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test Results for Social Dining
Likert ItemFixed Interval - Mouth OpenFixed Interval - WearablesMouth Open - Wearables
L10.0149822.7779540.030762
L20.0090370.0188792.875024
L30.0321350.0147801.186658
L50.3816610.1287040.010598
L60.0338512.2616570.041135
L70.0027782.8708180.004217
L80.0666410.2655220.019570
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
A.12  Phase 2 and 3 Raw Data
Phase 2 raw data for bite timing is provided in Table A9. Phase 2
and 3 Likert item raw data is provided in Table A10-A15.
Table A10: Individual Fixed Interval Likert Raw Data
Participant  L1  L2  L3  L4  L5  L6  L7
P13322255
P25335335
P32223366
P45456437
P57535477
P65115177
P72111177
P86626666
P93313237
P103111145
P116223467
P126223366
P135235267
P143333555
P156636477
Table A11: Individual Mouth Open Likert Raw Data
Participant  L1  L2  L3  L4  L5  L6  L7
P13655453
P27777666
P36666666
P43767657
P53333253
P67777322
P73766665
P86666566
P95555235
P107777657
P116645544
P124666322
P136675533
P141655322
P156777665
Table A12: Individual Wearables Likert Raw Data
Participant  L1  L2  L3  L4  L5  L6  L7
P13655453
P27777666
P36666666
P43767657
P53333253
P67777322
P73766665
P86666566
P95555235
P107777657
P116645544
P124666322
P136675533
P141655322
P156777665
I14766657
I26777666
Table A13: Social Fixed Interval Likert Raw Data
Participant  L1  L2  L3  L4  L5  L6  L7  L8
P163224552
P266666777
P342153665
P474576776
P563566776
P611111172
P741233664
P822222363
P965355666
P1032575276
P1163455656
P1265565555
P1355453666
P1435355375
P1563335666
Table A14: Social Mouth Open Likert Raw Data
Participant  L1  L2  L3  L4  L5  L6  L7  L8
P113623322
P236652353
P327722522
P425665355
P535562354
P615555422
P736666666
P855253335
P915341331
P1023562265
P1154443545
P1226542224
P1316652221
P1415665223
P1556766553
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
Table A9: Timing Appropriateness Ratings by Method and Dining Context (Number of Participants)
Context   MethodVery Early  Early  Slightly Early  Right Time  Slightly Late  Late  Very Late
Individual
Fixed Interval0000492
Mouth Open0029310
Wearables00213000
Social
Fixed Interval0128130
Mouth Open0315510
Wearables0228210
Table A15: Social Wearables Likert Raw Data
Participant  L1  L2  L3  L4  L5  L6  L7  L8
P166656666
P277777777
P355554354
P465766567
P556556456
P676777777
P756666677
P812533231
P955666677
P1074377677
P1123322265
P1254544556
P1356665776
P1435655776
P1567777777
I176747777
I255565666
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
A.13  Phase 2 Qualitative Responses
We include all qualitative responses from all participants from the
Phase 2 study below.
A.13.1    Why did you prefer your highest ranked method? Please
elaborate and compare the methods for both the individual and social
settings.
•P1:“It was the most seamless and recreated the way I usually
eat by waiting for me to stop chewing and moving before
bringing the spoon closer to my mouth. In the social setting,
it waited until I stopped talking before bringing the spoon
closer and if I was in the middle of a conversation, I could
easily stop it from coming closer. In the individual setting,
it just followed a good pace for eating.”
•P2: “I preferred the highest ranking method because it
required the least amount of thinking of like should i go
for a bite or should i not in a social setting especially. I also
liked it the most in the individual setting because it would
wait for me to finish chewing or be ready. I did not have to
think about if I should signal for a bite or if I need to chew
faster.”
•P3: “I think the wearable method was especially beneficial
for the social setting, since the actions for pausing the feed-
ing aligned well [with] the social cues where I’d rather not
be disrupted. For the individual setting, I think the aware-
ness of chewing served a similar function. Assuming I’d like
to be fed continuously, the wearables introduced brakes for
situations where I need a bit more time.”
•P4: “Within the social setting, the timing of each bite was ap-
propriate, never interfering with the conversation. Within
the individual setting, it allowed me to eat at a faster pace,
also giving the bite at an appropriate time.”
•P5: “During the individual portion, the wearables method
was able to adjust and bring food faster than the fixed
portion one. In the social setting the wearables and fixed
interval were both similar, since I wasn’t eating as quickly
as the individual portion. The mouth open method was a
bit distracting, and the detection for when my mouth was
open was a bit inconsistent. I had to keep my mouth very
wide open for a pretty long time for it to work.”
•P6: “I thought it allowed me to have a seamless conversation
without needed to do any extra or unnatural movements. It
was also a seamless individual experience because I was not
producing any head or throat movements, and therefore
the robot did not stop on the way to my mouth.”
•P7: “The wearables had the best timing for solo dining
since I did not have to wait between bites, and it did not
deliver the food too early. For social dining, this method
also had the best timing but was slightly distracting for the
conversation, though still better than the other methods.”
•P8: “I liked that the fixed interval was the most predictable.
I could more easily plan my conversation topics when I
knew the robot was on a schedule. For individual eating,
I thought this method was on the slow side, but I think
I still preferred this method. For social interactions, this
method was preferable for the reason stated above, namely
predictability.”
•P9: “I prefer the wearables approach since it did not require
me to actively do anything (compared to mouth open) or
to needlessly wait (as in fixed interval). It was particularly
helpful in the social context where it did not require me
interrupting the conversation.
•P10: “The wearables (my highest ranked) method was very
intelligent and felt seamless in both scenarios.”
•P11: “when i’m on my own, fixed interval seems slow and
ineffective, even annoyingly suspenseful. In a conversation,
it’s nice to have time to chew, drink, talk and not worry
about the robot. the other methods that asked me to act in
order to get food or stop the food from coming got in the
way of conversation and were additionally cumbersome
because the robot couldn’t accurately react to my signals for
giving me/stopping the food. the robot couldn’t see when i
opened my mouth asking for food. i’m sure this would be
much, much worse for individuals who are farther from the
norm in computer vision datasets. the same is true with the
wearables signals stopping the food from coming. i wanted
food to come but i was also talking. i can talk with food in
my mouth. this isn’t 1700s france.”
•P12: “The wearables method allowed for the best over-
all timing of the bites. In the social setting, it was pretty
seamless and I was pretty distracted by the conversation
to notice the robot waiting or needing any direction from
me to proceed with its trajectory. For the individual setting,
I thought it moved slightly quickly but overall timed the
bites well without making me wait too long.”
•P13: “The wearables method had the least mental workload
for me, and I felt like I didn’t have to do much on my end or
wait significantly long for the food to reach my mouth. For
the individual portion, it felt most like I was having a natu-
ral meal and the timing felt most appropriate, and likewise
for the social dining portion. The fixed interval portion was
not distracting, but the timing for food often felt prolonged
or rushed depending on the rate I was consuming the food.
For the mouth open portion, the robot’s commands felt dis-
tracting, especially in a social setting where I felt obligated
to open my mouth in the middle of conversation.”
•P14: “I liked the wearables method because it required the
least amount of thought during the social and individual
setting. It felt the most seamless and like it didn’t interrupt
my train of though while eating.”
•P15: “It required the least amount of work on my part and
had the best timing. I didn’t have to open my mouth or wait
unnecessarily long for the food to come. Additionally, in the
social setting I could continue having a conversation and
the robot would stay still and wait. Thus, it wouldn’t make
the conversation awkward. I felt like mouth open made the
conversation a bit awkward. Additionally, because I was
told to take the bite as soon as possible for fixed interval it
also made conversation a bit awkward.”
A.13.2Which methods did you feel in control while using? Why/why
not?
•P1: “I felt more in control using the wearables method
because I could stop it at any time. I also felt in control for
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
the mouth open method, but not as much in control. Once
you signaled to the robot you were ready, you couldn’t
really change your mind about the bite, which became
awkward in the social setting.”
•
P2: “I felt in control using the mouth open and the wear-
ables. In those, either it waited for me to clearly be done
with my bite including chewing or it would wait for me to
signal that im ready to eat.”
•
P3: “I felt most in control with the mouth open condition,
since it relied on an explicit cue to trigger the feeding. The
wearables came second in this regard. Sometimes thought,
I don’t know if the actions fully captured my intent to stop
the feeding. I have no control over the fixed interval setting,
since that operated on a fixed cycle regardless of what I
was doing.”
•
P4: “I felt in control with the two non-timed methods, be-
cause they reacted to my prompting. I didn’t feel as in con-
trol with the timed method, because if I wanted it sooner
or it came too soon, I still had to take the bite. ”
•P5: “The mouth open made me feel most ‘in control’ in
the sense that I can most easily tell it that I didn’t want to
eat, because if I didn’t want food in the wearables method I
needed to come up with something that will pause the arm
from coming in like talking or chewing (or pretending to
chew). The timing one didn’t have any feedback so I didn’t
really feel in control, but the interval was long enough that
I never felt like I was rushed to eat, even if I couldn’t tell it
when I was ready.”
•P6: “The fixed interval did not allow me to be in control at
all since it was based on a fixed time interval and not my
own movements. The mouth open made me feel somewhat
in control, but when it did not recognize my mouth move-
ments, especially in the social setting, it was a bit awkward
and I felt that I needed to put a lot of mental and physical
effort. The wearables made me feel in control in the sense
that it understood my natural body movements and I did
not have to exert any additional effort in order for it to feed
me.”
•P7: “The wearables and the mouth open methods since I
could determine when I could receive the next bite. Mouth
open had the most control but was slightly inconvenient
since it interrupts the conversation.”
•P8: “I felt most in control of the mouth opening method,
though there is nuance in this answer. I think the mouth
opening gave me the most control over the timing of the
robot, but the fixed-interval gave me the most control of
social interactions. ”
•P9: “For the individual setting, I think the mouth open and
wearables felt in control. However, moving my head and
opening my mouth felt a bit artificial. In the social context,
the wearables and fixed interval felt more controllable as the
open mouth procedure was interrupting the whole dining
flow.”
•P10: “I felt the most in control with the mouth open method
because I could signal to the camera whenever I wanted to
eat, although I had to keep my mouth open for a while. The
other two methods gave me less sense of control because I
didn’t give an explicit signal for being ready to eat.”
•
P11: “ironically, fixed interval. wearables was pretty an-
noying as i had to stay unnaturally still to get food. mouth
open just didn’t detect my mouth a lot of the time.”
•P12: “I felt in control using the mouth open method, since I
could tell the robot to give me the next bite pretty explicitly
by opening my mouth. I thought the wearables sometimes
made me feel control, but the sensors sometimes didn’t pick
up on the fact that I was still chewing. The fixed interval
method didn’t really look for when I was done with the bite
to give the next one, so the timing was pretty late.”
•P13: “I felt most in control while using the mouth open and
wearables methods because the robot actively responded
to my behavior. The wearables method felt more seamless
since I didn’t have to perform the action of opening my
mouth for every bite. For the fixed interval, I felt like the
robot was in more in control of when I took bites, since I
couldn’t really do anything to signal that I wanted to take
bites or wanted to take a break.”
•P14: “I felt in control when using the wearables and the
mouth open because it either looked or waited for some
sort of cue from me. The fixed interval one was just based
on time, so it didn’t feel like I could control any part of it.
•P15: “Mouth open. The robot wouldn’t move until you gave
it the command to.”
A.13.3Which method had the most appropriate bite timing? Elabo-
rate on why it had the most appropriate timing and compare it to the
other methods.
•P1: “Definitely the wearables one. It was the easiest to use
and I could stop it / let it continue whenever I wanted.
The fixed interval one was okay during the social setting
because I would just take a break from my conversation
whenever the robot brought the spoon closer to my mouth,
but there was a lot of waiting when there was no social
context. The mouth open was the most awkward during
the social setting because you had to manually signal to
the robot during the conversation. It was better in no social
context because you could time the bites better.”
•P2: “The wearables had the most appropriate bite timing
because compared to the other methods, it would wait for
me if I started chewing or talking after I signaled that I was
ready to eat. I didn’t have to control the conversation for
a pause around the time that the bite would be ready. In
terms of the individual portion, I liked this timing the best
because it didn’t force me to wait for another bite like the
other ones, it kind of naturally matches my pace, the other
ones felt a little slow or fast at times.”
•P3: “I think the wearable provided the most appropriate bite
timing. I think they were all not horrible though, including
the fixed interval. Strangely, the fixed interval felt most
appropriate during the social setting since it was easier to
anticipate.”
•
P4: “Within the social context, I’d say both fixed interval
and wearables had the most appropriate timing. 45 seconds
felt too long when eating individually, but worked well
within the conversation. The wearables also knew when
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
I was ready to take a bite, both within the context of a
conversation and individually. The mouth open method
had a delay between when I wanted the bite and when I
was given the bite, and it was awkward at times to turn my
head, or to open my mouth in the middle of a conversation.”
•P5: “The wearables one felt the most appropriate across
both portions, since it would slow down the feeding interval
during the conversation portion, but was able to adjust to
the individual portion when I wanted bites more frequently.
The mouth open one has good timing too since I could tell
it exactly when to bring the next bite, but since it took a
while for the robot to detect my open mouth, the timing
felt a little slow.”
•
P6: “The wearables method had the most appropriate bite
timing because it was based on my natural body movements.
Sometimes the mouth open method did not recognize my
mouth opening, so I had to open wider or open more times,
which took up a lot of effort and time. The fixed interval
method was not convenient in terms of the social setting
because it couldn’t understand my social cues/behavior and
make the bite timing more appropriate based on that.”
• P7: “The wearables had the best timing for individual din-
ing since it delivered a bite whenever I was nearly done
chewing. For social dining, the wearables was slightly dis-
tracting since sometimes during the conversation, I wanted
to wait until the other person stopped talking before taking
a bite (even if I wasn’t moving, chewing, or talking).”
•P8: “In social dynamics I think timed eating was the best
option for me. The wearable method did not offer me much
of a benefit. It seemed too quick for the pace of conversation.
Because I speak more slowly and take time to think between
ideas, I felt the robot was smothering me with food when I
was hoping to talk.”
•P9: “The wearables definitely had better bite timing as I did
not need to needlessly wait or artificially open my mouth.”
•P10: “The wearables method was the best. I really liked
how the robot spoon would start approaching me slowly
as I was getting more ready to eat (the rate of movement
also felt more appropriate and adaptive depending on my
rate of chewing), as opposed to the fixed interval method
which would move quite fast.”
•P11: “fixed interval. there was simply too much effort and
time and focus dedicated to controlling the robot. i can
just take the bite when it comes if i have enough time in
between to chew and drink and talk. fixed interval enabled
that. I spent most of the time trying to communicate with
the robot in the wearables and open mouth method.”
•P12: “Overall the mouth open method had the most appro-
priate bite timing, since I signaled when I wanted the next
bite. The wearables method was overall slightly early, as
the sensors didn’t always pick up when I was still chewing.
The fixed interval method had good timing for the social
setting but was late for the individual setting, so I was kind
of just sitting there waiting for the next bite.”
•P13: “I think the mouth open method had the most appro-
priate bite timing because the robot only moved when I
signaled for it to, and I could take things at my own pace (i.e.
taking a break from eating if I wanted to). The wearables
method had the second most appropriate bite timing since
the robot moved according to the pace I was eating and
talking. The fixed interval method, as mentioned, often felt
rushed or prolonged for timing between bites.”
•P14: “I think the fixed interval one was good during the
social setting because it gave me a substantial amount of
time during each bite. I didn’t mind it during the individ-
ual one too because it allowed me to be mindful of my
bites. I think the most appropriate timing was the wear-
ables though because it was able to understand when I was
finished chewing.”
•P15: “Wearables. It would wait for me while I was chewing
and talking. Compared to mouth open, the robot would
remind me to open my mouth and wouldn’t come until I did.
This meant that I had to pause conversation, turn towards
the robot, open my mouth, and wait for it to come which
disrupted conversation a bit. Additionally, fixed interval
seemed to make the robot come at random points during
the conversation which also disrupted conversation a bit.”
A.13.4    What cues do you think a caregiver/you use to know when
to feed a care recipient/yourself a bite?
• P1: “stop chewing and stop talking”
•P2: “When i am still for a bit, I think its a good indication
of when to feed me a bite, or more specifically if I am still
for a bit and maybe look at the food for a bit too.”
•P3: “While I did not appreciate the experience, I think prob-
ably some sort of explicit gesture or cue would easiest.”
•P4: “Finishing a swallow, not talking, expectant look, open-
ing mouth. ”
• P5: “Looking at the food, stopping conversation”
• P6: “Head turning or mouth opening”
•P7: “Caregiver: A minor physical cue without the move-
ment of the head, like a finger tap. Myself: When eating
alone, I would take bites once done chewing. For social
dining, I would take a bite in natural pauses in the conver-
sation.”
•P8: “I am curious if a nod would be helpful. The open mouth
seems like it could have worked, though the camera seemed
to see me speaking as cuing the robot.”
•P9: “Mainly determining if the person’s mouth who is eat-
ing is ready or not; i.e., not empty. In a social context, it
would be knowing a pause would occur where the person
could grab a bite.”
• P10: “The amount of talking, the speed of chewing”
•P11: “when i fed my sick grandmother, we would talk, and
i would wait until she was done chewing and drinking
to give another bite. this is also how we do with babies.
robots simply don’t have that amount of sensitivity and
our academic and research institutions aren’t nearly as
equitable as they’d need to be to build models that detect
this non-verbal cues in people with different backgrounds,
needs, abilities, etc. if i’m feeding someone who is farily sick,
i would ask. voice recognition may be something. but then
again, many automated voice systems are discriminatory
to accents and various dialects not reflecting the elite.”
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
•P12: “I think a caregiver would probably look for when a
recipient has swallowed and looks like they have finished
chewing their bite to give them the next one.”
•P13: “I think the cues that a caregiver would use to know
when to feed a care recipient a bite would include some
sort of communicated signal (mouth opening or a nod) or
simply seeing when the recipient had stopped chewing and
swallowing.”
•
P14: “The cues I use are when I am done chewing, when I
am done talking (social setting). For others (recipients), I
think I would wait for a head nod or some physical/visible
signal.”
•P15: “When the recipient isn’t chewing or talking. This
indicates that the recipient is done taking the previous bite
and that they’re available for the next bite.”
A.13.5    Which method was closest to how a caregiver/you would
perform this task? Please elaborate on why.
• P1: “Definitely the wearables one.”
•
P2: “I think the wearables is the closest to how I would
perform the task because, when I change my mind and
want to take a little longer between signaling for a bite and
actually eating it, it matches my time so i dont really feel
rushed or I dont feel frustrated with the slowness.”
•P3: “Probably the mouth open or the wearable. The former
is more like asking for each bite, while the later is effectively
assuming the recipient would like to be continuously fed
and waiting for somewhat appropriate moments to initiate.”
•P4: “Mouth open, because it’s responsive for certain, so
you know the person wants another bite.”
•
P5: “I think the wearables was the closest, since it wouldn’t
give the bite when I clearly didn’t want it, and it would
adjust to the environment to decide when to give the next
bite, like a person would.”
•P6: “The mouth open method because I assume mouth
opening is a cue for caregivers to give a scoop.”
•P7: “Wearables, the timing for individual dining was the
best, and while it was slightly distracting during social
dining, it was still the best among the three in terms of
timing and interruption.”
•P8: “I think the wearable method would best simulate a
caregiver in theory; however, I did not find this to be true
for my experience. I would think that open-mouth cuing
would be next for simulating a caregiver. I think a hybrid
method could be the best option. one where an open mouth
cues the motion, but the wearable gives feedback while it
is en-route to slow or stop the robot if necessary.”
•P9: “The wearables was closest as it dynamically waited
but it did pause a bit on its trajectory which was a bit
distracting.”
• P10: “Wearables method.”
•P11: “fixed interval. i was simply given enough time to eat
and drink and talk. it wasn’t a chore.”
•
P12: “I think the wearables method is probably closest
to how I would perform this task, since it looks for the
recipient for feedback as to when the next bite should be
given, without forcing them to be very explicit/make it feel
incredibly unnatural.”
•P13: “I think the last method (wearables) was closest to
how a caregiver would perform this task since it was unin-
terrupted and felt like the most natural timing according to
the caregiver/robot’s observations of the recipient’s eating
patterns.”
•P14: “I think the mouth open because it is a visual cue.
The timed one, I dont think a caregiver would use because
it’s too rigid of a method. The wearables, I think it may be
difficult for a caregiver to know exactly when the person is
done chewing.”
•
P15: “Wearables. I would only give the recipient food when
they want it and when it’s natural. I think this was most
successfully accomplished by the wearables. Only feeding
at fixed intervals is a bit awkward since you could be dis-
rupting the recipient’s conversation/chewing. Additionally,
although mouth open guarantees that the recipient wants
food and is available to eat, it disrupts the conversation so
it feels less natural.”
A.13.6    Were the glasses comfortable to wear while eating? If not,
please explain.
•P1: “I am used to wearing glasses, so the glasses where
comfortable to me.”
•P1: “Yes they are comfortable, but it may be due to already
wearing glasses on a normal basis.”
• P3: “Did not bother me. ”
•P4: “I usually wear glasses, so visually I didn’t have any
discomfort. After taking them off, I noticed that they were
a bit heavy, but I hadn’t noticed that strain while wearing
them.”
•P5: “They were about as comfortable as normal glasses.
Although the bottom brim of the glasses did block my view
a little, making it harder to see the spoon.”
•P6: “They started falling down but I think that is just be-
cause I have a low nose bridge. I don’t think this would be
an issue for other people.”
• P7: “Yes”
• P8: “Yes, I did not notice them.”
• P9: “Yup, they felt natural.”
•
P10: “The glasses were generally comfortable; they were
quite lightweight but as someone who doesn’t ordinarily
wear glasses, the frames felt a bit thick and changed my
field of view as a result. There was no physical discomfort
otherwise.”
•P11: “I hardly noticed the glasses. they protected me from
getting hit in the eye by the robot, in fact.”
• P12: “The glasses were comfortable to wear while eating.”
•P13: “The glasses were comfortable (since they were my
own glasses)–the additional sensor was also not too dis-
tracting.”
• P14: “Yes.”
•P15: “They’d slip down my nose occasionally, but I didn’t
find it too much of a bother.”
A.13.7Was the throat microphone comfortable to wear while eating?
If not, please explain.
• P1: “Yes, I stopped noticing it once the trial started.”
WAFFLE: A Wearable Approach to Bite Timing Estimation in Robot-Assisted Feeding
•P2: “Yes, I didn’t really notice it that much as it wasn’t that
tight and I forgot about it quickly after I put it on.”
• P3: “Did not bother me.”
• P4: “I didn’t notice it very much.”
•
P5: “I barely noticed the microphone, probably because I
wasn’t moving much.”
•
P6: “It was a bit uncomfortable in the beginning but I forgot
it was there after awhile.”
• P7: “Yes”
• P8: “Yes, I also did not notice this”
•
P9: “They were initially distracting when put on, but after-
wards when listening to instructions, eating, talking in the
social setting, etc I forgot I was wearing them.”
•
P10: “The throat microphone was fine although I wouldn’t
want to wear it for a prolonged period of time due to the
fact that I don’t like having something touch my neck all
the time.”
•
P11: “it felt annoying in the beginning. but then in conver-
sation I forgot about it. different levels of anxiety could see
a device like that bring a lot of stress to someone.”
•P12: “The throat microphone was okay to wear while eat-
ing, though it was kind of tight and I could definitely feel it
during the experiment.”
•P13: “The throat microphone was relatively comfortable
to wear while eating, and once I got used to it I could eat
without it being a distraction. It was a little uncomfortable
in the beginning, and especially when I was not eating since
I could feel it putting pressure on my throat.”
• P14: “Yes.”
• P15: “Yes, I didn’t really feel it during the test.”
A.14  Phase 3 Qualitative Responses
The 2 individuals with motor impairments answered the follow-
ing questions verbally after both the individual and social dining
sessions and their responses were transcribed after. I1 did the indi-
vidual session first while I2 did the social session first.
A.14.1Did you like this bite timing method for this setting? Why or
why not?
•
I1 (Individual): “I do like it. Cause I’m in control of the
meal, when I was gonna take the bite, when I wasn’t. Like
before, it seemed pretty . . .  to flow pretty good. You know?
So if it was just me sitting there eating dinner then it was
pretty good. I liked it.”
•I1 (Social): “Yes, because it just let me have a conversation
and eat at the same time.”
•I2 (Individual): “Yes, I like it, um. . .  I didn’t have to think
about it, it was...The timing was great, it was. . . I loved it
really.”
•I2 (Social): “Yes... Um, I liked it because I didn’t have to. . .
stop what I was doing and do a specific action. And be like,
hold on, don’t talk for a second. You know, just, um. . .  like
I said it was almost seamless, it was...I didn’t really have to
think about it. It’s just the most I had to think about was,
shutting up and not moving, so I can eat. But otherwise,
yeah, I...because there was no other action involved I really
liked it.”
A.14.2    Did you feel in control while using the robot with this bite
timing method for this setting? Why/why not?
•
I1 (Individual): “Yes. It stopped when I wanted to. From
the commands you gave me, it seemed to work pretty good.”
•I1 (Social): “Yes... It just seemed to go pretty good with the
commands you gave it.”
•
I2 (Individual): “Um, yeah, for the most part, I think one
time I...Moved my head, and it didn’t listen to me, but it
could have been a slighter move that I didn’t realize was
little or, but it wasn’t a big deal, it’s not. Everything else it
responded to perfectly.”
•
I2 (Social): “For the most part. Um, it’s a little weird feeling
just this fork coming at you, you know? Um, but it was
controlled enough that I wasn’t afraid that it was gonna hit
me in the face without me stopping first.”
A.14.3Did this method have appropriate bite timing for this setting?
Elaborate on why/why not.
•I1 (Individual): “Yeah. No it was alright. Because the robot
can only go so fast...I thought it was pretty, pretty good.”
•I1 (Social): “I think pretty much most of the time, yeah. It
just seemed like when I was not chewing and it just when I
turned and it was like ‘oh, I’ll take a bite of this’ they were
waiting for me.”
• I2 (Individual): “Yup... see above.”
•I2 (Social): “Um, yeah, I would say so. Um,...I don’t know
how much more to say. But yeah, I like this setting. the
setting, the bite timing, I... it just seemed to work.”
A.14.4    What cues do you think a caregiver uses to know when to
feed you a bite for this setting?
•I1 (Individual): “If it was a caregiver. Probably watching
when I was done chewing. Like, if I turn toward them,
obviously, they’d think you know it was time to give me a
bite.”
•I1 (Social): “Um, probably whether I’m still chewing or
not. Different movements or mannerisms. Yeah, if there’s a
pause in the conversation maybe... or if I just stop talking.
Maybe they’re like ‘oh, he wants a bite’.”
•I2 (Individual): “If we’re watching TV, forget about it. This
[the robot] is so much better, cause if we’re watching TV,
they don’t watch me as much as they watch the TV. You
know, a lot of times. I mean some are better than others,
but yeah. That’s.. They don’t pay attention that’s... So yeah
this is great.”
•I2 (Social): “I’ve actually told some of them ‘watch for me
chewing.’ You know, if I’m done.. if I’m still chewing, you
don’t need to pick the fork up. You don’t, you know, as far
as that, you don’t need to...come toward me with it. I’ll tell
you a funny story real quick. One of my caregivers kept
putting the fork so close, you know, like, here, have a bite,
and I still had a mouthful. I said, next time you do it, I’m
gonna show you what’s in my mouth. And I did. And I
opened my mouth, and I still had, you know, because if a
bite’s big, it takes you longer to chew. Um, but yeah, so
that’s really what I’ve told them to look for, too. Mostly
that, and...It drives me crazy when I’m talking to somebody,
Padmanabha*, Yuan* et al.
and they’re feeding me, and they go to give me a bite. You
know, so I have to tell them when the other person’s talking
is when you need to give me the bite.”
A.14.5Was this method close to how a caregiver would perform this
task for this setting? Please elaborate on why.
•I1 (Individual):  “I would say yes. Because when I wanted a
bite, I got it... it was just a different pathway I guess. Rather
than me asking for a bite or turning, opening my mouth and
doing basically the same thing with a robot but just keeping
my head still and not chewing or talking....Different chain
of commands.”
•I1 (Social): “I would say yes. It didn’t seem to take away
from the conversation, so it was just kind of part of that
environment I guess?...It just seemed to not interrupt the
conversation.”
•
I2 (Individual): “No, way better, way better than they
would do it...Way better just to be truthful. You hear that?”
•I2 (Social): “Oh, I kind of answered that, right? So, yeah.
It waited for me to stop moving and talking and chewing.
Yeah.”
A.14.6    Were the glasses comfortable to wear while eating for this
setting? If not, please explain.
• I1 (Individual): “Yeah they were ok.”
• I1 (Social):  “Yeah, they weren’t too bad.”
•
I2 (Individual): “Oh, there we go, yeah. I didn’t even notice
them.”
•
I2 (Social): “Yeah, actually. When you... well, when you
first put this thing on, I’m like, I got this piece of tape over
there, but I forgot it was there after a while... The black tape
probably would’ve. . . wouldn’t have been as obvious, but
yeah, once we started eating, I forgot it was there.”
A.14.7Was the throat microphone comfortable to wear while eating
for this setting? If not, please explain.
• I1 (Individual): “I got used to it pretty quick.”
• I1 (Social): “Yeah, it was fine. ”
•
I2 (Individual):  “That’s the same thing, too, is it’s... not
used to it on my neck, but it’s not so uncomfortable that
I’m like, I can’t do it. You know, it’s just...it’s...what’s the
word? Awkward, but not uncomfortable.”
•
I2 (Social): “Um, it’s not bad when you first put it on, I
was like, Because I’m not a big like turtle neck, tight neck
person, but I kind of forgot about that, too. So it’s a little
snug, but it’s not awful.”