Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide
Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot Design
Hochul Hwang
hochulhwang@cs.umass.edu
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
Hee-Tae Jung
heetjung@iu.edu
Indiana University Indianapolis
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
Nicholas A Giudice
nicholas.giudice@maine.edu
University of Maine
Orono, Maine, USA
Joydeep Biswas
joydeepb@cs.utexas.edu
University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas, USA
Sunghoon Ivan Lee
∗
silee@cs.umass.edu
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
Donghyun Kim
∗
donghyunkim@umass.edu
University of Massachusetts Amherst
Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
ABSTRACT
Dog guides are favored by blind and low-vision (BLV) individu-
als for their ability to enhance independence and confidence by
reducing safety concerns and increasing navigation efficiency com-
pared to traditional mobility aids. However, only a relatively small
proportion of BLV individuals work with dog guides due to their
limited availability and associated maintenance responsibilities.
There is considerable recent interest in addressing this challenge
by developing legged guide dog robots. This study was designed
to determine critical aspects of the handler-guide dog interaction
and better understand handler needs to inform guide dog robot
development. We conducted semi-structured interviews and obser-
vation sessions with 23 dog guide handlers and 5 trainers. Thematic
analysis revealed critical limitations in guide dog work, desired
personalization in handler-guide dog interaction, and important
perspectives on future guide dog robots. Grounded on these find-
ings, we discuss pivotal design insights for guide dog robots aimed
for adoption within the BLV community.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing→Accessibility technologies.
KEYWORDS
Accessibility, Individuals with Disabilities & Assistive Technologies,
Robot, Interview
ACM Reference Format:
Hochul Hwang, Hee-Tae Jung, Nicholas A Giudice, Joydeep Biswas, Sunghoon
Ivan Lee, and Donghyun Kim. 2024. Towards Robotic Companions: Under-
standing Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot
∗
Co-corresponding authors.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
©2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
Design. InProceedings of Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human Fac-
tors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24).ACM, New York, NY, USA, 20 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1  INTRODUCTION
Around the world, there are over 250 million blind and low-vision
(BLV) people. This number is expected to rise to more than 700 mil-
lion by 2050, largely due to the increasing and aging population [1].
Notably, within the United States, this demographic is expected to
double, mirroring the worldwide trend [114]. Among the various
assistive tools supporting safe and efficient navigation, a critical
aspect of daily life, dog guides stand out as remarkably effective
companions, enhancing mobility, confidence, and independence for
these individuals [82,118,120]. For example, formally-trained dog
guides are known to enable handlers to be more mobile [76,93],
walk faster [23], navigate more efficiently by taking direct routes
instead of following edges or shorelines [47], and exhibit superior
travel performance, with indicators including orientation, mobility,
and difficulty with travel [75], compared to people who use a long-
cane. However, only a small fraction of BLV people benefit from
dog guides [36,37]. The main factors underlying this are the limited
availability of dogs and the substantial cost and time investment
required by guide dog schools to train and deploy a dog guide (ap-
proximately $40,000 USD and a 2-year training period [35,38,111]).
Moreover, not all trained dogs ultimately serve as dog guides [81],
further underscoring the scarcity of these invaluable resources.
Even in cases where a dog guide is potentially available for
placement with a BLV handler, the decision to work with a dog
guide is a complex and multifaceted process. Some BLV people may
not meet health requirements for obtaining a dog guide (e.g., the
ability to walk several miles a day or suffer from dog allergies) [40,
84], while others might lack the financial means to support the
essential care and maintenance costs (approximately $1,000 USD
each year [111]). And those who choose to work with a dog guide
also take on the responsibilities of ownership, including exercise,
feeding, and grooming, which can be burdensome for the handler.
Furthermore, individuals might have to confront the challenge of
managing emotional consequences from the retirement of a dog
guide [97].
In contrast to their animal counterparts, robots offer unparal-
leled mass productivity, cost-effectiveness (commercially available
quadruped robot starting from less than $2,000 USD [95]), low
arXiv:2402.06790v1  [cs.RO]  9 Feb 2024
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
maintenance, and longevity, paving the way for innovative mobil-
ity aids. The utilization of robotic systems to enhance mobility for
BLV individuals traces back to as early as 1976 (i.e., the MELDOG
project) [106,107]. Since then, researchers have proposed vari-
ous forms of robotic guides, including smart canes [102,116,128],
suitcase- or cart-shaped [49,69,128], and drones [4,6,109]. More re-
cently, owing to recent advancements in quadruped robots [59,65],
four-legged robotic systems have gained attention as a potential
solution to enhance the mobility of BLV people [20,21,29,52,58,
66,73,123]. Quadruped robots offer natural and efficient travel
mechanisms that enable navigation through uneven terrains and
complex structures in real-world environments, such as stairs and
curbs, that BLV people encounter in their daily lives. However, our
research highlights a critical gap in guide dog robot studies: insuf-
ficient attention to user needs and requirements. This oversight
can be largely attributed to the absence of user-centered research
within robotics that examines the interactions between dog guides
and their handlers in real-life scenarios. Such research is essential
to discern which qualities of dog guides should be preserved in
robotic counterparts and to identify specific challenges that need
to be addressed to overcome the limitations inherent in dog guides.
To identify such qualities and bridge the knowledge gap, we
conducted semi-structured interviews with 23 dog guide handlers
and 5 professional dog guide trainers. Our aim was to gain a com-
prehensive user-driven understanding of the interaction dynamics
between handlers and their dog guides to identify the key qualities
that should be translated to guide dog robots. Based on these data,
we extracted valuable insights to inform the development of a guide
dog robot. A subset of seven dog guide handlers were also engaged
in observation sessions, during which we observed handler-dog
guide units navigating familiar surroundings. The qualitative data
resulting from these interactions was subjected to rigorous the-
matic analysis, yielding meaningful codes and patterns that were
further consolidated into overarching themes.
Through our multi-pronged qualitative studies, we discovered
a compelling need motivating the development of a new mobility
aid in the form of a quadruped robot (or theguide dog robot) [55].
This revelation stems from anecdotal evidence extracted from the
rich data obtained from interviews that underscore the inherent
limitations within current handler-guide dog interactions, which
include unidirectional communication between the handler and
the dog guide, the dog guide’s limited ability to understand situ-
ationally important contextual information, and the dog guide’s
lack of flexibility in adapting to new environments and confusing
situations. Subsequently, we delve into the continuous interactions
between handlers and their dog guides which is necessary for per-
sonalizing the dog guide’s behaviors to fit the handler’s needs. We
recognize the value of these evolving interactions, as they stand
as a foundational aspect for the design of effective robotic mo-
bility aids but have not yet been systematically investigated and
documented in the existing literature. Lastly, we explore the expec-
tations and concerns among dog guide handlers in the context of
guide dog robots based on their lived experiences. Drawing from
these findings, we present new design implications for future guide
dog robots. This paper sheds light on the discrepancies between
real-world handler-guide dog interactions and previous guide dog
robot development efforts, emphasizing the importance of incor-
porating human-centered design principles for BLV people. By
highlighting recent advancements achieved in robotics, we aim to
draw more awareness and attention to designing and developing a
new and highly effective user-validated robotic mobility aid as an
additional option for BLV individuals, aligning with the growing
interest within the HCI community [15, 79].
In summary, this paper contributes to HCI and robotics research
on guide dog robot development for BLV people as follows:
•
We compile knowledge established by dog guide schools
and professional trainers to characterize the mismatch be-
tween handler-guide dog interactions and emerging guide
dog robot development.
•Based on semi-structured interviews and observation ses-
sions conducted with dog guide handlers and trainers, we
emphasize the demand and utility for a new mobility aid by
revealing the limitations in the handler-guide dog interac-
tion.
•We present the continuous interaction between the handler
and dog guide and highlight the key components that are
personalized to the handler’s needs that may be pivotal for
the real-world deployment of the robot.
•
We propose, to the best of our knowledge, the first set of
user-driven guide dog robot design guidelines in terms of
hardware, software, and interface to foster guide dog robot
development.
Given the prevailing norm in language usage, namelyguide
dog, we will use this terminology instead of the formaldog guide
throughout the rest of the paper.
2  BACKGROUND
This section provides background information on standardized ap-
proaches used by handlers and guide dogs to interact and cooperate
in facilitating nonvisual navigation. The information presented in
this section, developed over the past century in the field of guide
dog training [33], forms the foundational knowledge upon which
our findings are built. We will begin by dissecting the fundamental
components of nonvisual navigation: orientation and mobility. We
will then detail the formation of the handler-guide dog partnership,
drawing upon seminal literature and official documents from guide
dog schools.
2.1  Shared Responsibility in Orientation and
Mobility Among Handlers and Guide Dogs
Orientationandmobilityare the foundational concepts that de-
fine the collaborative effort between handlers and guide dogs in
facilitating safe and effective navigation [119]. Orientation entails
knowledge of one’s position and facing direction in relation to
landmarks and keeping track of these spatial relationships, while
mobility is the act of safely and efficiently moving through space.
The combination of these two skills facilitates purposeful and di-
rected movement within the surrounding environment, resulting
in effective navigation. In a typical navigation scenario from point
A to point B, the environment may feature guiding landmarks
(e.g., curbs, poles, shops) and hindrances (e.g., construction cones,
pedestrians, holes). Orientation enables individuals to monitor their
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 1: Connection through the harness. (a) Various types of harness handles exist to match different guide dog handlers. For
example, the offset harness on the right can be used for handlers who tend to step on their guide dog’s foot due to their gait.
(b) The handler is transitioning from grabbing an extended leash to grabbing both the leash and the harness handle before
walking. (c) The handler is trained to be positioned on the right side of the guide dog while walking, specifically next to the
hindquarters, often grabbing the leash and the harness handle with the left hand.
spatial orientation relative to these landmarks, while mobility facil-
itates secure, unobstructed progress between these landmarks and
ultimately toward the destination [47, 119].
In the partnership between guide dogs and their handlers, a
shared responsibility model emerges, with each playing distinct
but interdependent roles [112]. Handlers take on a pivotal role
inorientationwhile guide dogs assume a vital role inmobility. In
other words, handlers are responsible for the general orientation
to the surroundings and making navigational decisions to reach
the destination by giving “cues” (i.e., commands) to their guide
dogs. Guide dogs, on the other hand, bear the responsibility of
ensuring safe mobility by responding to the cues provided by their
handlers. While supporting mobility, they are trained to maintain
a straight line and avoid obstacles and potential hazards in the
path of travel [112,119]. Guide dogs also possess the capacity to
“intelligently disobey” when they perceive that following the cue
would pose a significant risk to the handler. For instance, they may
refuse to proceed if there is a fast-approaching moving object that
could endanger the handler. This shared strategy ensures effective
navigation while leveraging the respective strengths of both the
handler, primarily responsible for orientation and the guide dog,
concerned with safe mobility.
2.2  Formation of the Handler-Guide Dog Unit
2.2.1    Matching.The process of pairing guide dogs with handlers
constitutes a pivotal step in establishing a proficient handler-guide
dog partnership. This matching process involves a comprehensive
assessment of both the handler and the guide dog. “Class-ready”
guide dogs, having successfully completed the required evaluation
outlined in Appendix A, are paired with potential guide dog han-
dlers based on various factors. The criteria for matching, while
varying among different guide dog schools, encompassed factors,
such as the potential handler’s age, height, weight, cause of blind-
ness, location (city and state), daily routine, walking speed, and
pulling force [10].
2.2.2    Connection and positioning.The handler-guide dog unit is
connected mainly through a rigid harness [112], although various
handle designs exist to accommodate variations in the physical
attributes of both the handler and the guide dog, including height
differences and handler preferences, as depicted in Figure 1a. While
handlers often hold a leash and the harness handle simultaneously,
the leash serves specific purposes, such as boarding buses, nav-
igating stairs or escalators, walking alongside a human sighted
guide, corrections, or relieving the guide dog, as illustrated in Figure
1b. However, the rigid harness primarily serves as the connection
during walking, offering precise control and enhanced safety. Im-
portantly, its rigid design is critical for enabling immediate stops
when necessary due to its direct connection. The handle’s angle is
also crucial, with a recommended 30-degree inclination to allow
effective tracking of the guide dog’s movements [112].
In general, the handler is positioned on the right side with respect
to the guide dog, using the left hand to hold onto the harness. This
enables the handler to search or carry objects with their right hand.
Specifically, the correct position of the handler is beside the guide
dog’s hindquarters during walking. This proximity enables the
handler to take an extra step and stand next to the guide dog’s
shoulders when the guide dog halts [112], as depicted in Figure 1c.
This positioning ensures safety by preventing the guide dog from
cutting in front of the handler and facilitates various interactions,
including efficient turns and maneuvering behavior.
2.2.3    Handler-Guide Dog Interaction and Prior Studies.Effective
communication between the handler and guide dog is essential for
clearly delineating their roles and responsibilities (e.g., orientation
and mobility) to ensure safe and efficient navigation. The handler
gives verbal cues, hand signals, and combinations of them to the
guide dog to convey intentions while navigating. Particularly, han-
dlers employ verbal cues for basic obedience, controlling speed
and direction, as well as directional indicators. In response, the
formally trained guide dog complies or intelligently disobeys based
on the situation. The handler then perceives the guide dog’s mo-
tions that are transmitted to the handler’s hand through the rigid
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
handle [119]. Maintaining consistent pulling strength or tightness
of the harness is crucial for both handler satisfaction [25] and to
ensure clear communication of direction to the guide dog [10, 58].
The existing body of qualitative research offers a range of in-
sights into the handler-guide dog interaction, yet it lacks extensive
and systematic surveys essential for the development of effective
mobility aids. Wong [122] highlighted the predominantly positive
experience reported by guide dog handlers, noting exceptions, such
as unwanted attention towards the dog and mobility constraints
without their dog. Similarly, a study by Miner [82] interviewed
eight guide dog handlers and reported their affirmative experiences
and insights on mobility while working with a guide dog. Rickly et
al. [94], on the other hand, reported some challenges encountered
by guide dog handlers, particularly related to transportation acces-
sibility, encompassing issues like service refusal and access. Gaunet
and Besse [44] assessed the behavior of 23 guide dogs and blind-
folded trainers in four different wayfinding navigation tasks. Our
study extends this body of research by identifying key attributes of
handler-guide dog interaction that should be retained in designing
a guide dog robot.
2.2.4Needs for a User-Driven Guide Dog Robot Guideline.Existing
research has provided valuable guidelines for user-driven robotic
guides, focusing largely on non-legged systems, addressing the
required technologies and challenges involved in developing such
robotic aids [55,56]. Others have adopted a participatory design ap-
proach to develop robotic guides focusing on indoor settings [8,34].
Additionally, Zeng et al.’s study on handle interfaces, which in-
volved testing a haptic handle interface in guiding robots with
blindfolded individuals, has contributed to the understanding of
user interfaces in robotic guides [126]. However, these studies of-
ten do not adequately capture the detailed, real-life interactions
between handlers and guide dogs, an aspect that may be critical for
the development of legged guide dog robots.
Building upon recent legged locomotion advancements, researchers
have embarked on developing guide dog robots to assist BLV peo-
ple, leveraging the natural efficiency of legged robots in navigating
complex terrains, such as stairs and curbs, that BLV people fre-
quently encounter. This initiative, supported by studies by Hamed
et al.[52], Xiao et al.[123], and others [20,21,27,29,58,67], repre-
sents a collaborative effort in the field. Xiao et al. [123] propose a
local path planner by formulating an optimization problem con-
sidering the two modes (taut or slack) of the human-leash-robot
relationship. Wang et al. [20] conducted an indoor and outdoor
walking experiment with BLV people to compare a quadruped and
a wheeled robot. They showed that BLV participants preferred the
wheeled robot over its quadruped counterpart (Cyberdog by Xi-
aomi [124]) due to the quadruped’s rough motion and noise while
walking. Hauser et al. [54] evaluated pedestrian experiences (or
humans’ perceptions of robots) during human-robot encounters
under different configurations (e.g., no user-robot connection, leash
connection, and harness connection) using a Spot robot (Boston
Dynamics[30]).
Although there are growing efforts to adapt quadruped robots
for BLV people, current user-centered research has not compre-
hensively captured key aspects necessary for the development of
guide dog robots. Moreover, most quadruped robots designed for
BLV individuals have failed to sufficiently meet user needs and
requirements. For instance, some studies used a soft leash [123] or
an elastic rope [21], as the primary connection method, which is in-
appropriate due to safety issues. Moreover, certain studies position
the handler far behind the robot, which is not ideal for high-speed
walking and safety due to the increased range of motion while turn-
ing and the delay in response time, confirmed by guide dog trainers.
Therefore, we aim to identify essential qualities of guide dogs that
should be mirrored in robots and to pinpoint specific challenges to
address the limitations of animal guide dogs, contributing to the
field by steering towards a more user-centric approach in guide dog
robot development, ensuring their design and functionality align
closely with the needs and experiences of BLV individuals.
3  METHOD
Our study seeks to improve our comprehension of the practical in-
teractions between handlers and guide dogs. Specifically, we aimed
to investigate (1) biological guide dogs’ capabilities and fundamen-
tal limitations, (2) how handlers interact with their guide dogs in
real-world settings, including whether they adapt or modify the
recommended interaction methods to suit their individual needs,
and (3) the expectations and concerns of guide dog handlers regard-
ing guide dog robots based on their experiences. We hypothesized
that the obtained information would offer invaluable insights to
inform the development of guide dog robots. To accomplish this,
we conducted semi-structured interviews and observation sessions
involving guide dog handlers and trainers. In this section, we detail
our study design and data analysis methods, with approval obtained
from the University of Massachusetts Amherst IRB.
3.1  Participants
We recruited handlers and trainers through snowball sampling
from December 2021 through August 2023. We initially contacted
organizations of BLV individuals and guide dog handlers [45,85],
three visually impaired service centers [39], and 13 guide dog train-
ing schools via emails and phone calls. The emails contained an
IRB-approved flyer and a video that was later audio-described for
enhanced accessibility. While the majority of participants were
recruited primarily in the United States, one participant from the
Republic of Korea was recruited through the snowball sampling pro-
cess. The recruitment of the seven participants for the observation
session was based on several considerations. These included the
availability of the participants who met our inclusion and exclusion
criteria, the distance the researchers needed to travel to their local
community, the complexity of their environment, and the handlers’
capability to navigate within their local community with a guide
dog without the need for human assistance.
The inclusion criteria for the guide dog handlers required them
to (1) be 18 years or older, (2) have visual acuity equivalent to or less
than legal blindness defined in the Social Security Act §1614 [98],
and (3) have at least six months of experience working with a guide
dog. For guide dog trainers, the inclusion criteria were to (1) be
18 years or older and (2) have five or longer years of experience
in guide dog training. Participants were compensated$50for the
interview and an additional$50for observation sessions, except for
one participant who refused compensation. Demographics of the
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Table 1: Guide Dog Handler Demographics and Collected Data
Participant  Age  Gender  Vision Level
Experience
(years / # of GDs
†
)
Interview  Observation
H01–FTotally blind36 / 4✓✓
H0269MTotally blind30 / -✓✓
H0363MTotally blind11 / 2✓✓
H0441MTotally blind20 / 4✓–
H0569FTotally blind36 / 5✓–
H0657FTotally blind34 / 4✓–
H0777MTotally blind9 / 1✓–
H0866FTotally blind0.5 / 1✓–
H0969MTotally blind53 / 8✓✓
H1067FTotally blind43 / 6✓–
H1136FTotally blind16 / 3✓–
H1269FLegally blind30 / 4✓✓
H1359MTotally blind21 / 3✓✓
H1470MTotally blind17 / 3✓–
H1581MTotally blind14 / 4✓–
H1670FTotally blind7 / 1✓–
H1775FTotally blind51 / 6✓–
H1877FTotally blind34 / 7✓–
H1978FTotally blind31
∗
/ 3✓–
H2070MTotally blind33 / 6✓–
H2164FTotally blind6 / 1✓✓
H2260FTotally blind16 / 4✓–
H2325FTotally blind7 / 1✓–
All subjects are legally blind having various conditions - H05, H06, H14: some light perception, H08: 20/2800 in one eye, H12: 20/200 in right, 20/400 in left (no peripheral vision),
H13: 20/2400, can see shapes, but no color distinction, H21: can see shapes, 20/2200 in one eye;
†
Indicates the number of guide dogs the participant worked with;
∗
The subject did
not work with a guide dog at the time of the interview.
Table 2: Guide Dog Trainer Demographics and Collected Data
Participant  Age  Gender
Experience
(years)
Interview  Observation
T0165M45✓–
T0252M19✓✓
T0358M35✓✓
T0441M22✓–
T0534F9✓–
The affiliations of the guide dog trainers with three guide dog schools were omitted from the table
due to their potential for participant identification and perceived lack of significance.
guide dog handlers and trainers are detailed in Table 1 and Table 2,
respectively.
All participants signed (or verbally agreed to) an approved con-
sent form. As a result, 23 handlers and 5 trainers were recruited.
The handlers’ age median is 69 years and the lower (Q1) and upper
quartiles (Q3) of the data are 60.75 years and 70 years respectively,
having three outliers. The median of their duration working with
guide dogs is 21 years and the lower and upper quartiles of the
data are 11 years and 34 years respectively. Most of the handlers
introduced themselves as totally blind although some participants
provided more detail of their visual acuity (see Table 1).
3.2  Procedure
We conducted observation sessions and semi-structured interviews
with guide dog handlers and professional guide dog trainers from
three different guide dog training organizations, which are all ac-
credited by the International Guide Dog Federation. The interview
questions were developed and refined with the help of a guide dog
handler and a trainer. The questions focused on guide dog function-
alities and handler-guide dog unit interactions. The interview was
conducted either via Zoom or in person with masks, in line with
COVID precautions until early 2022.
In order to achieve an in-depth understanding of the interactions
between the handler-guide dog unit in their natural environment
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
and to gain hands-on experience with the guidance of profession-
als, we incorporated observation sessions during the interviews.
These sessions involved observing guide dog handlers as they navi-
gated familiar environments with their guide dogs, offering real-life
demonstrations of their interactions. Additionally, observation ses-
sions with guide dog trainers offered insights into the training
processes of the handler-guide dog unit.
3.3  Data Collection
We gathered comprehensive data, encompassing demographic infor-
mation, over1,940minutes of audio-recorded interviews, and240
minutes of video-recorded observation sessions (excluding redun-
dant viewpoints). Subsequently, all recorded data were transcribed
into text. One interview conducted in Korean was transcribed from
daglo [26], then translated from Korean to English using Naver
Papago [87], and further modified for grammatical soundness. Ad-
ditionally, non-verbal interactions between guide dogs and handlers
observed during observation sessions were transcribed into text for
analysis.
3.4  Data Analysis
The data were analyzed using thematic analysis [13]. The first,
second, and corresponding authors individually analyzed a subset
of the transcriptions using an open coding scheme. Specifically,
Microsoft Word and Google Docs comments were utilized for open
coding to create codes. Then, all authors contributed to generating
affinity maps (i.e., axial coding) using the Miro software by con-
necting codes. Iterative processes of open coding and discussion
continued until all authors reached the saturation of codes and
agreed on the coding scheme. Initially, the first, second, and corre-
sponding authors individually coded approximately five interviews
each to create an intermediate coding scheme. Subsequently, the
first author coded the rest of the interview and observation data
according to the coding scheme. Then, all the authors reviewed the
codes and developed the themes in an iterative manner until all
authors came to an agreement on the themes. We clearly state that
generative AI technologies using large language models, notably
ChatGPT, were not used for data analysis.
4  FINDINGS
Our study reveals three pivotal findings: 1) crucial limitations within
the handler-guide dog interactions, which may open opportunities
for an additional robotic mobility aid, 2) the continuous interactions
personalized over time and tailored to align with the handler’s
specific needs, and 3) the perspectives, sentiments, and challenges
encountered by guide dog handlers in the context of guide dog
robots.
4.1  Critical Limitations of Interactions with
Guide Dogs
The limitations discovered within the handler-guide dog interac-
tion, such as the guide dogs lacking human-level environmental
awareness, unidirectional communication between handler and
guide dog, and inflexibility in adapting to unfamiliar environments
and change, provide insights into the potential design implications
and open opportunities for guide dog robots.
4.1.1    Challenges in Achieving Human-Level Environmental Aware-
ness.From our interviews, we uncovered a crucial theme: the strug-
gle of guide dogs to comprehend the context of their surroundings
as humans. Although guide dogs must grasp the nuances of the
encountered situations and their surroundings, it is challenging for
these animals to fully understand as their ability to have human-
level environmental awareness of their surroundings is limited by
their inherent intelligence.
The inability to understand the environmental context often
confounded guide dogs to find important navigational objects or
landmarks. For example, in the bustling cityscape, finding an empty
seat on public transportation can be a triumph or a blunder for
the handler-guide dog unit. Several BLV handlers highlighted the
significance of this seemingly mundane task of finding an empty
seat, whether in public transportation or in a doctor’s office. Indeed,
among the 17 guide dog handlers we discussed about finding empty
seats, only seven were confident in their ability to locate these
vacant seats with their guide dog. The majority found themselves
inadvertently settling into an already occupied seat. Teaching guide
dogs to identify an empty seat might seem straightforward, but
due to the lack of understanding of the surrounding context, guide
dogs often fail to identify a seat as H22 mentioned, “But they don’t
always know that the end table is not a seat. They just know it’s
a place that’s low enough and you can sit on.” We found that this
was not just about seats. H07’s guide dog struggled to locate a
door attached to glass walls and the handler’s car, despite regular
interactions with both.
Another crucial aspect that guide dogs lack is a comprehen-
sive understanding of spatial constraints for obstacle avoidance.
All guide dog schools that participated in the GDUI survey [45]
train their guide dogs to detect, indicate, or avoid overhead obsta-
cles, such as hazardous tree branches and signs, underscoring their
recognition of the potential threat posed by such obstacles. Out
of 17 BLV individuals, two expressed confidence in their ability to
avoid overhead obstacles. The majority recounted unfortunate inci-
dents involving collisions with tree limbs, branches, construction
signs, tapes, scaffoldings, and even the side mirrors of trucks. This
difficulty is consistent with findings from previous studies [60,121],
which have frequently highlighted it as a limitation.
Teaching guide dogs to recognize overhead obstacles pose chal-
lenges, as these animal companions are naturally inclined to focus
on monitoring ground-level rather than chest-level (or above) spa-
tial extent. Moreover, we found that the nature of the overhead
obstacle adds complexity to the problem. T05 shared that the objects’
weight and density come into play, with lighter objects like tree
branches proving harder to detect compared to the more conspicu-
ous obstacles like poles. These challenges are further compounded
by the way branches naturally grow and how they bend due to
weather conditions like rain or snow. Although some handlers
expressed a reluctance to walk with their guide dogs in the rain,
they occasionally need to commute during a drizzle or encounter
unexpected showers, as H05 confirmed:
“My first dog, I remember [...] It was always raining or
snowing or sleeting or something when I got him, and
there were these branches and he was going so fast it
knocked the hood off my head.”-H05
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
H10’s story added a twist, recounting the struggles of navigating
rope barriers in the queue at a bank, where the guide dog couldn’t
grasp the need to navigate around them, as going under was a
straightforward option for the dog.
4.1.2    Unidirectional Communication.One critical limitation that
handlers perceive when working with biological guide dogs is the
inability to receive essential information related to unpredictable or
accidental situations encountered during navigation. While the han-
dler can convey navigational instructions to the guide dog through
gestures or verbal cues, the communication from the guide dog to
the handler is restricted to haptic feedback via the rigid harness,
as outlined in Section 2. This constrained one-way communication
often falls short of conveying vital details about the surrounding
environment, potential hazards, or the risk of collisions, sometimes
resulting in tragic accidents. Throughout our interviews, a recur-
ring theme emerged: the difficulties stemming from the absence of
verbal feedback from guide dogs.
When guide dogs stop for potential dangers to ensure safety, the
responsibility to identify the risk and the reason for the stop falls
on the handler to discern, as H14 mentioned, “they stop and let you
try [to] figure out what is in front of you, why they’re stopping.
They make you figure it out. They can’t communicate why, but they
just stop”. In such situations, guide dog handlers resort to tactile
exploration, using their foot or hand to identify potential sources
of danger (H03 and H11). When handlers cannot find a clear reason,
they may decide to move forward, which can lead to accidents,
ranging from relatively moderate incidents like tripping off a curb
or falling into a pool, as H01 and H03 mentioned, to more severe
adversities, including the loss of life. T01 highlighted the case of a
guide dog handler who had the ability to travel often but made a
wrong decision due to a misperception of the environment which
could have been prevented by giving appropriate feedback to the
handler.
“One client I’m talking about, she died falling in the
subway. She didn’t have a dog from me anymore and
it wasn’t the dog’s fault, because she let go of the dog
as she fell in the subway. She told the dog to get on a
train that wasn’t there. Multi platform subway station.
She heard the train went over, but she swore it was her
train.”-T01
In fact, we found that handlers often desire to receive more expla-
nation from their guide dog about the environment and situation.
The majority of the interviewed handlers expressed the wish to
receive information about the surrounding environment from the
guide dog, such as details about upcoming corners and streets or
the name of the store they are passing by in a shopping center.
H11 who resides in an urban area wished to know if there were
any upcoming construction, as she mentioned, “In terms of like
practical things, I guess if they could tell me about oh, we’re coming
up to some construction or things like that, that might be nice too”.
H12, who mainly used a bus before retirement, highlighted that it
would be helpful to know if it is the right bus to be getting on. H06
expressed a desire to obtain information about traffic light colors,
especially in noisy intersections where it is difficult to interpret
the traffic flow by listening. H14 emphasized the value of any com-
municable information: “Anything that can be communicated will
be useful. Anything. Change in the sidewalk, change in the road.
Some cars are doing that now. They’ll tell you the difference in
the pavement or a difference in the... whatever. Anything to accli-
mate you to your situation.” Regarding indoor settings, H03 and
H22 noted that having information about the people in a meeting
room, dimensions, and furnishings, such as available seats, would
be immensely beneficial.
4.1.3    Low Adaptability to Unfamiliar Environments and Changes.
Guide dogs achieve their full potential through extensive train-
ing and experience. However, rapid adaptation to unfamiliar envi-
ronments or situations is not their strong suit. Nevertheless, han-
dlers inevitably need to visit new locations, and our living spaces
and travel environments are continuously evolving. This includes
changes in traffic rules, object placement, environment layouts, and
technology, all of which collectively present ongoing challenges.
Our research shows that handlers and trainers find it difficult to
provide additional training programs, aids, or assistive devices to
compensate for a guide dog’s limited adaptability in the face of
unfamiliar or evolving environments.
When guide dog handlers visit unfamiliar places, they often rely
on sighted guides or GPS-based devices and apps for navigation
assistance. However, sighted guides may not always be accessible,
and independent GPS devices may fall short of fulfilling handlers’
requirements. H06 and H09, for instance, pointed out that they
need to simultaneously use multiple apps depending on the situ-
ation, which is inconvenient and quickly drains both battery and
data. Others used visual interpreting service apps, such as Aira [3],
which connects to a sighted guide located remotely to provide nav-
igational assistance using the smartphone’s camera. However, as
H06 described, obtaining reliable and confident support from a
remote guide can sometimes be challenging. H11 also emphasized
the inconvenience of using such an app when carrying items in
their hands. H04, a South Korean urban resident, expressed that
using GPS-based apps like Google Maps is difficult in a densely pop-
ulated, high-rise environment due to the GPS sensing inaccuracy, a
concern echoed by H17, a New York City resident.
Adapting to evolving environments also presents unforeseen
complexities in guide dog work, posing a significant challenge.
Long-term guide dog handlers, with over 40 years of experience,
highlighted the increased difficulty of travel compared to earlier
times with only parallel traffic. Factors such as the Right-Turn-on-
Red principle, crossing islands, blended sidewalks and streets, and
the proliferation of electric cars were identified by H10 and H17
as contributing to the heightened complexity of safe and efficient
navigation in urban settings. T02 noted that while guide dogs can
detect nearby low-speed electric cars, those approaching from a
distance or at high speed still pose a challenge:
“The biggest challenge now with traffic is all the new
hybrid car and electric car because they’re don’t make
any noise, they very silence and clients have a hard
time judge traffic or know if there is a car coming or
not. If it’s really very close to or turning or something,
then the dog will, like intelligent disobedience, the
dog will stop. But if it’s coming from far away or it’s
coming fast or something, the dogs will not really
judge this correctly.” -T02
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
4.2  Continuous Interactions are Required to
Adjust the Behaviors of Animal Guide Dogs
to Meet the Handlers’ Needs
Comprehensive information regarding the interaction methods be-
tween guide dogs and their handlers, the range of services provided
by guide dogs, and the training mechanisms is crucial when devel-
oping a guide dog robot. This information is readily available in
the published literature, as we have summarized in Section 2 and
Appendix B - Table 4. However, we also discovered that the interac-
tion between the handler and the guide dog does not always strictly
adhere to the established methods. In some cases, handlers may
deviate from the prescribed method taught by the training schools
to align with their specific needs. For example, we discovered that
interactions between handlers and guide dogs evolve over time,
driven by day-to-day guiding work and additional training provided
by the handlers. This signifies that class-ready guide dogs when
initially matched with a handler, may not be performing at their full
capacity. It is in the period following their pairing and collaborative
work with the handler as a team that guide dogs truly grasp and
adapt to each handler’s unique requirements, ultimately refining
their behavior to become a “well-patterned” (e.g., personalized)
guide dog. We delve into the evolving nature of these interactions,
shedding light on what guide dogs autonomously learn and what
handlers teach their dogs to emphasize the importance of person-
alization. This emphasis could provide valuable insights into the
development of an effective guide dog robot.
4.2.1Learning to Autonomously Navigate Routes.As is detailed in
Section 2, the handler-guide dog unit’s roles are distinct: handlers
oversee orientation, while guide dogs take charge of managing
mobility. However, over time, these roles may become somewhat
blurred, particularly in environments that the unit regularly visits.
With increasing guide dog’s familiarity along a route, guide dogs
often overtake the role of orientation. Consequently, the frequency
of interactions between the handler and the dog substantially de-
creases over time. For instance, the handlers may skip directional
cues such as “turn left” or “turn right” on over-learned routes or
locations, as H11 mentions, “I just have always found that it’s just
really by repetition and by ... I don’t really have to have a specific
command. It’s more by doing it enough and she learns it that way.”
As this learning process continues to evolve, guide dogs may even
navigate to frequently visited places autonomously conditioned
on that the route is relatively simple and short. We observed this
phenomenon during our observation session with H01, who stated,
“I’m not giving him a direction. I’m just hanging on to the [harness]."
as the participant walked toward the office door where she works.
H16 also shared a similar experience of reaching a destination
without any cues:
“I can take a walk of my brother’s house is about four
miles away in Winchester. And once, we cross the
street about a block from my house, he knows where
we’re going and I really don’t have to say anything
the rest of the way. I do. But I don’t really have to. He
just takes me right to their back door.” -H16
However, it is important to emphasize that even with extended
familiarity, handlers maintain ultimate responsibility for orientation
and retain control over the overall navigation task. A guide dog
trainer emphasized this point, stating that
“The dogs, even though the dogs aren’t responsible
for orientation, they start to pattern pretty well on
regular routes. [However] The person is responsible
for knowing where they are [...]” -T04
The autonomous orientation learned from experience by guide
dogs can occasionally lead to inconvenience. This can manifest
when a dog assumes a route to a frequently visited location when
the actual destination lies beyond that familiar spot. For instance,
H10 and H12 shared experiences where their guide dogs directed
them to a regularly visited grocery store while they were on route
to a different place. In both cases, they had to intervene and redi-
rect their guide dogs by firmly saying “No” when the dogs made
incorrect autonomous decisions. However, it is noteworthy that
handlers often refrain from correcting this behavior to maintain
consistency in their guide dogs’ navigation habits. This reluctance
stems from the desire to preserve the convenience of the developed
autonomy for frequent visits to familiar places, as T03 pointed out:
“But you don’t really correct the dog because some
days you want the dog to go there.” -T03
Our findings collectively suggest that simply transferring the
orientation role from a handler to an autonomous navigation al-
gorithm in robots may not be an appropriate approach for guide
dog robot development. Identifying formal criteria to assess the ap-
propriate level of autonomy transfer is an open question. However,
our findings clearly reveal that subtle variations in navigation roles
exist within the unit, and handlers rely on or correct the autonomy
of their guide dogs depending on the situations and goals at hand.
4.2.2    Additional Training to Teach New Behaviors.One specific
training that handlers prioritize is teaching new verbal commands,
landmarks, vocabulary, and behaviors, all of which are tailored to
the handlers’ individual needs and their unique living environments.
Indeed, underscoring its significance, “home training” involves
trainers personally conducting handler-guide dog unit training in
the vicinity of the handler’s home. To accomplish these customized
objectives, handlers often utilize a standardized training technique
called back-chaining (also referred to as tagging, targeting, and
patterning). H18 articulated by stating,
“The basic commands are for all the guide dogs. And
then I hone in my guide dog’s training to the specifics
that I need. [...] and now it’s up to me to reinforce the
things that he [guide dog trainer] has taught us, dog
and me. And then I will be increasing her training to
specifics that I need in my life."-H18
For instance, T03 and T05 mentioned that many handlers teach
their guide dogs to find crosswalk buttons, trash cans/dumpsters,
mailboxes, poles, and even ATMs through additional training, which
serve as important navigational landmarks. This was also evidenced
by H03 during the observation session, who used his guide dog
to locate specific poles and drain grates while walking in his local
community. Additionally, some handlers introduced new vocabu-
lary to address their unique living environments. H21, for instance,
taught her guide dog to find exit stairs due to frequent fire alarms
in her apartment building. Sometimes, handlers like H23 shared
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
(a)(b)(c)
Figure 2: Observation of personalized stops. (a) The guide dog is trained to stop at tactile pavings from the guide dog school. (b)
H21 trained her guide dog to stop at cracks in the sidewalk. (c) H21 also trained her guide dog to stop at larger cracks existing
in H21’s local community.
their experiences of teaching new vocabulary to refer to specific
destinations: “When I used to go to my psychology building, [...] I
could simply say, ‘To psychology’, and my guide dog knew that we
were headed to that specific building.” Some handlers also taught
new commands to demonstrate a specific behavior to fit their needs.
For instance, H23 explained that she taught her guide dog a cus-
tom cue, “follow”, to enable the dog to trail a particular person at
a slower pace, a skill not originally included in her guide dog’s
training program. This adjustment proved useful for navigating
crowded areas. Similarly, H06, H07, H09, H11, H15, and H17 trained
their dogs to find hand railings or banisters near stairs to assist
their physical weaknesses when ascending or descending stairs.
Another aspect of personalization that handlers emphasize is
the guide dog’s stopping criteria during navigation, often refined
through trial-and-error experiences. While guide dogs receive foun-
dational training to stop when encountering curbs and potential
hazards, they may not initially grasp the handlers’ subtle prefer-
ences. For instance, H20 prefers stopping at every minor obstacle,
such as cracks and tree roots, but mentioned that his guide dog
would continue unless it’s a curb due to their relatively short time
together (i.e., two weeks). Conversely, H14 and H22 preferred to by-
pass low-rise toe-trip obstacles. Therefore, H22 conducted further
training to instruct the dog to halt only when obstacles reached a
height of two inches or higher. Trainers noted that these prefer-
ences depend on the handler’s physical abilities, such as balance
and residual vision, as well as the handler’s age.
Interestingly, some handlers selectively bypass designated stops,
contrary to guide dog trainers’ instructions, for the sake of effi-
ciency. For example, H08 relies on her residual vision and occasion-
ally gives her guide dog a left turn command just before reaching a
curb, a practice she acknowledges she shouldn’t do but finds more
efficient.
“And I do something that I probably shouldn’t do,
but at a certain point in my neighborhood, instead
of making her walk me all the way to the end of the
sidewalk and stop at the curb, I give her a left turn
command right before we reach the curb. [...] And
I shouldn’t do that. I should probably always make
her stop at the curb, but it just seems like it’s more
efficient to just, ‘We’re going to turn left. Just go up
there. I’ll go up to the light pole, turn left and off we
go.’” -H08
Geographic location and environmental factors also influence
where handlers choose to stop. Handlers in colder regions of the
United States, like H11 and H21, often encounter broken sidewalks
with large cracks. We observed that H21’s guide dog stopped at
every crack along the sidewalk, as shown in Figure 2, during the
observation session. On the other hand, H18, who resides in a rural
area with less distinct curbs, mentioned that her guide dog stops at
the edges of roads or ramps. H22 also shared an interesting experi-
ence of using her familiarity with her surroundings to personalize
the stopping criteria in busy city environments.
“Now on the New York City subway, a lot of times
the stairway is very close to the track and you have
to go around these posts and there are people in the
way. And so she sees that as unsafe. So there are
times I have to encourage her to go along, even if
she thinks it’s unsafe, which is something they teach
you definitely not to do in school. [...] But I grew up
in New York, so I know New York. Yeah, I know the
New York City system. [...] So they’re taught not to
go over those, but there are times you do have to walk
on those.” -H22
Despite the extensive personalized training required for class-
ready guide dogs, their working lifespan is relatively short, with
retirement typically occurring at around eight to ten years of age.
Consequently, handlers find the process of personalization burden-
some, as they must repeat it each time a dog retires and they start
working with a new one. H20 stated that
“It’s a learning experience for both you and the dog.
And of course, just when you and the dog really get
good, the dog is getting older and it’s almost time to
think about retiring the dog.” -H20
4.3  Handlers’ Expectations and Concerns
Towards Guide Dog Robots
This section explores key facets related to the expectations and
concerns of guide dog handlers in their prospective collaboration
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
with guide dog robots. While we cannot anticipate their perspec-
tives grounded on direct experience with guide dog robots until
this technology becomes a reality, interviews with handlers and
trainers provide valuable insights into the critical considerations
that should inform the development of this emerging technology.
In general, our findings indicate a high likelihood of acceptance for
this innovative technology, driven by their optimistic expectations
of its potential to address various challenges faced by guide dogs.
However, the interviewers also highlighted several inherent chal-
lenges of artificial systems, such as difficulties in establishing trust
and a sense of agency.
4.3.1    Expectations.During our interviews, we received unequiv-
ocally positive feedback about the concept of a guide dog robot.
This enthusiasm should be tempered with the consideration that
the respondents, given their generally positive disposition toward
robotic systems, might be biased in their preferences for technology.
Furthermore, the interviewers expressed their opinions with the
underlying assumption that the robot would provide navigation ser-
vices with the same proficiency as animal guide dogs. Nonetheless,
a common belief emerged among both handlers and trainers that
technologies, including guide dog robots, represent a promising av-
enue for enhancing their mobility and functionality. This optimism
stems from artificial systems’ capacity to expedite development
cycles, seamlessly integrate advanced sensing and computing capa-
bilities, and provide the flexibility to perform additional functions,
as highlighted by insights from participants H03, H09, and H11.
“So, I tell people all the time when I speak that tech-
nology is a hundred times faster than medicine. To
find a cure for my eyes I’m hopeful, but not banking
on it. Where I’m banking on [is] technology, just like
you guys with the robot.” -H03
During the course of our interviews, we discovered that guide
dog handlers hold the belief that guide dog robots have the poten-
tial to alleviate critical inherent challenges that handlers typically
encounter when working alongside living animals. H05 and H08
highlighted the advantage of a robot by providing examples of BLV
individuals who cannot work with guide dogs due to allergies and
financial constraints. H03 added a positive outlook of a guide dog
robot based on personal experiences with discrimination while
traveling to another country having to be quarantined for over a
month due to different disability laws and acts. H23 added that the
most common issue is ride-share discrimination, despite the Amer-
icans with Disabilities Act (ADA) federal law against it, a finding
that aligns with the lived experience of one of the authors of this
paper and observations made by Rickly et al. [94]. H18 suggested
that career professionals may prefer a robot due to apartment re-
strictions on pets. H09 pointed out that a robot could assist BLV
individuals with limited mobility and orientation skills who cannot
have a guide dog. H19, the second oldest subject, mentioned the
benefit of physically being able to lean on a robot as her walking
and balance abilities decline with age. H08 concluded that a guide
dog robot would bridge these gaps:
“But that’s why I’m excited about your robot because
it’s going to fill a niche that a dog can’t fill. . . . I think
what you’re doing is really necessary and I’m really
all for it. I think that when I’m 90 years old, a dog
is going to be too much for me, but a robot will be
perfect.” -H08
Several handlers viewed a robot as an integrated system that
is able to contain multiple sensors. Specifically, H11 anticipated
improved vision through advanced cameras, surpassing the capa-
bilities of dogs. H09 sought an integrated GPS system, eliminating
the need for using multiple apps as discussed in Section 4.1.3.
“So all of that stuff can be put into one box. I’m all for
it. [...] But again, it’s using all of these different apps.
I want it all in one box. And a robot will do that.” -
H09
In addition, H03 anticipated functionality enhancements to bol-
ster security:
“So I’m thinking for security, you probably should
have something like... Every day in America, a blind
guy with a cane is hit over the head and they steal
his wallet. [...] I think you should have some type of
button with an alarm and with some type of 9-1-1 call,
so that you could provide a certain amount of security
feeling, a safe feeling, for the blind person.” -H03
Opinions about the robot’s appearance vary: some handlers value
visibility to the public, while others lean towards a more incon-
spicuous design. Additionally, there is a spectrum of preferences
concerning dog-like attributes, including the presence of a head,
ears, and fur.
4.3.2    Trust.Guide dogs’ navigation assistance holds profound
importance beyond simply offering convenience for handlers. Han-
dlers entrust their very lives to their guide dogs. When BLV individ-
uals begin to work with a guide dog, they commonly do not mainly
use white canes, but mainly work with guide dogs. Therefore, the
responsibility for mobility and the inherent risks associated with
community navigation—such as collisions with cars, falling into
holes, or tripping over obstacles—shifts to the dog. Given this heavy
reliance on guide dogs for crucial safety, trust between the han-
dler and the dog emerges as a paramount factor to be addressed
in the development of guide dog robots. Indeed, some handlers
expressed strong concern about the difficulty of establishing trust
with a robotic system. H17 stated, “I mean, that trust is, I think, a
very important component of the whole thing. And you’re not go-
ing to get that from a robot.” She further speculated that guide dog
handlers might not use robots for such a reason, but people who are
not working with a guide dog could adopt them. H05 questioned
about building a bond with a guide dog robot, saying:
“I think something like this robot would be good as
far as the right, the left, the down, the guide, but you
still don’t have that special bond that you do with the
dog and person. There’s such a relationship.” -H05
However, our finding indicates that trust is not merely a byprod-
uct of the inherent nature of animal dogs. H05 highlighted the
unique bond between handlers and their guide dogs compared to
regular pets: “A lot of people have pets and they’re real close to
them, but it’s not the same as when you’re trusting your life to a
dog.” The trust developed with a guide dog is rooted in a long-term
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
partnership and shared experiences. In fact, several handlers admit-
ted that they did not trust their guide dogs in the beginning. H18,
for instance, mentioned this while explaining her experience with
her seventh guide dog, with whom she had been partnered for only
nine days at the time of the interview:
“We are all over the place with this new dog. Well,
I’ve only been with her for nine days, so it’s still very
new and very unpredictable. [...] Well, for one thing,
confidence, the longer I’ve worked with a guide dog,
I trust my life to that dog and to my new dog, I don’t
yet trust my life to this new dog. Not yet, but we’re
working together.” -H18
H18 mentioned that she would do more verbal communication
with the new guide dog to establish a bond so that the guide dog can
get used to her voice, distinguishing it from others. H03, H10, and
H17 noted that trust is cultivated over time as they and their guide
dogs navigate challenging situations, ones that handlers could not
manage on their own, like safely avoiding obstacles. H15 described
a defining moment that solidified his trust in his guide dog during
training with his instructor in a bustling area:
“We turned around and started back, there were lots
of people and I started thinking we were going to be
hours. They were still under construction with the no
end. And I said about all this stuff and all of a sudden
I came back to reality and said, ‘This dog is getting
through all these people, all these obstacles.’ They
always tell you trust your dog. And at that moment I
believe it completely. It was very enlightening.” -H15
From our interviews, it became evident that trust is rooted in a dy-
namic interaction that demands a sustained, long-term partnership,
personalization, and most importantly, a high level of reliability in
the services that should be provided.
4.3.3    Sense of Agency.Sense of agency, denoting a user’s percep-
tion of control over actions and their outcomes [42,83], is a critical
aspect that should be considered when creating a system with au-
tonomy [11]. One noticeable indicator of a high sense of agency
over a particular system is a user’s willingness to take responsibil-
ity for undesirable results [51,101]. We found guide dog handlers’
profound sense of agency while collaborating with their canine com-
panions. Notably, handlers, including H01, H03, and H05, readily
took responsibility for their actions and outcomes, even in accident
scenarios. H05 shared her experience of an accident, “I’ve been
hit by a drunk driver with my first dog before and it wasn’t my
dog’s fault, it was my fault, partly.” While guide dogs offer a high
degree of autonomy, where maintaining a strong sense of agency
is generally difficult, handlers expressed high self-responsibility
based on clear expectations regarding the dogs’ abilities. Such in-
nate comprehension may be absent in robotic systems, potentially
posing a significant barrier to the adoption of robotic guide dogs.
Transitioning from guide dogs to robotic counterparts requires
thoughtful attention to user agency. One potential approach is
ensuring that handlers retain controllability during navigation,
enabling them to intervene as necessary. This sentiment was under-
scored by handlers, including H19, H21, and H22, who stressed the
need to maintain authority over the robot in diverse real-world con-
texts. Both H21 and H22 drew attention to situations that necessitate
on-the-fly adjustments in the robot’s navigation. H21 mentioned, “I
mean, I think that there are times where it’s appropriate to be able
to type in something and just go straight there. But I mean, things
happen.” H19 further accentuated the significance of control:
“Easily change the program on the spot. And if you
can’t do that, it might not be as useful as a dog.” -H19
5  DISCUSSION
In this study, we aimed to bridge the gap between guide dog robot
developers and stakeholders (i.e., guide dog handlers and trainers)
by gaining user-driven insights into handler-guide dog interactions
based on semi-structured interviews with 23 guide dog handlers
and 5 professional guide dog trainers. Thematic analysis revealed
key findings crucial for guide dog robot design, encompassing (1)
limitations in handler-guide dog interaction, (2) the importance of
continuous interactions to fulfill handlers’ needs, and (3) handlers’
perspectives on guide dog robots.
This paper offers unique insights into guide dog robot develop-
ment. While numerous studies have delved into the capabilities and
limitations of guide dogs [25,75,82,97,118,120], and the interac-
tion between assistive devices and BLV individuals [49,69,102,113,
128], efforts to understand and analyze users’ requirements with
respect to mobile robots remain sparse. Many studies, even those
proposing mobile assistive devices, have either primarily empha-
sized autonomous navigation in new environments [49,69,108] or
overlooked users’ perspectives in design [21,27,29,52,123]. Thus,
the intricate dynamics between guide dogs and handlers in their
daily lives, particularly where handlers take an orientation role,
remain under-explored. This paper aims to bridge this knowledge
gap, drawing on the real-world experiences of stakeholders. In our
discussion, we consolidate key aspects of robot development, in-
tegrating our findings with existing research, and suggest design
considerations that encompass the hardware, perception, and inter-
face facets of a guide dog robot. Additionally, we acknowledge the
limitations of our study and outline directions for future research.
5.1  Design Implications
5.1.1Form Factor.When designing a guide dog robot, several key
factors must be considered, including leg length, overall dimen-
sions, weight, protective features, and appearance. Regarding the
robot’s size, it should be compact enough to fit beneath seats on
subways or airplanes, the spaces where guide dogs typically rest, as
our findings support that handlers frequently use public transporta-
tion. Simultaneously, it must be large enough to walk over stairs,
which typically range from15-19cmin height [96]. The robot’s
weight should strike a balance between ensuring portability for an
individual and providing enough heft to convey its movements and
effectively halt the handler when necessary.
Regarding the guide dog robot’s exterior, it should feature ade-
quate waterproofing and dustproofing to protect its internal elec-
tronic components considering that the handler may encounter
unexpected rain. An Ingress Protection (IP) rating of at least IP65
would be appropriate, denoting complete dust resistance and pro-
tection against low-pressure water jets from all directions. Thermal
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
management should also be considered in design to operate in
extreme weather [112]. In terms of appearance, as reported in Sec-
tion 4.3.1, we may personalize it according to the users’ needs.
5.1.2Sensors and Security.We identified important considerations
for the sensor suite of guide dog robots. One pivotal aspect is mit-
igating the vision sensors’ blind spots. Current guide dog robots
predominantly utilize vision sensors, incorporating a combination
of stereo cameras [58], depth sensors [21,66,67,123], and LiDAR
sensors [21,27,66,67,123]. However, an exclusive dependence on
vision can be problematic. There are inherent blind spots made by
the handler standing adjacent to the robot, and potential inaccura-
cies due to close proximity sensor measurements, as highlighted by
Liu et al. [74]. While guide dogs utilize their vision, they also em-
ploy their acute sense of hearing to detect approaching objects [77].
Thus, diversifying sensor modalities, perhaps by integrating acous-
tic sensing, could amplify the perceptual capabilities of guide dog
robots, ensuring safer navigation.
Addressing the detection of overhead obstacles, a known limi-
tation of guide dogs [60,121], is pivotal in developing guide dog
robots. To mitigate this problem, the integration of overhead mon-
itoring sensors is essential. Promising solutions include the use
of stereo cameras, strategically positioned on the robot as demon-
strated in CaBot [49], and gimbal-mounted cameras, similar to the
approaches in Xiao et al. [123] and Chen et al. [21]. These techno-
logical adaptations may enhance a critical area of safety, addressing
issues identified with animal guide dogs.
In the context of enhancing security and ensuring that robotic
operations are limited to authorized users, exploring a variety of
authentication methods is pivotal. For example, haptic or biometric
authentications present a viable solution, enabling the identification
of registered users with the added benefit of customizable privacy
options [31]. It is essential to consider diverse authentication strate-
gies for reducing privacy vulnerabilities in robot design.
5.1.3Battery.Our findings suggest that the robot’s battery should
sustain operations for more than two hours. This recommendation
stems from the average walking habits of our participating guide
dog handlers, most of whom primarily depend on walking or public
transport. Notably, commercial quadruped robots from Unitree
Robotics, advertise a battery life of 2 to 4 hours [95]. However,
designers should consider that this duration could diminish due to
various factors such as extra sensors (e.g., LiDAR) and the energy
to pull a user (∼40 N[58]).
5.1.4    Perceptual Intelligence.Recognizing objects for navigation
is an indispensable technology for guide dog robots, serving as the
handlers’ “eyes”. Although computer vision has advanced signifi-
cantly with the advent of deep learning techniques [70], focused
research in the context of guide dog robots remains scarce. Unlike
road environments, which predominantly feature distinct lanes and
obstacles with limited variations such as vehicles and pedestrians,
sidewalks introduce a myriad of unique challenges. A guide dog
robot must adeptly navigate along sidewalks, identifying a safe tra-
jectory while recognizing diverse obstacles, from electric scooters
and bicycles to overhead tree branches and sidewalk cracks. No-
tably, while there are expansive datasets tailored for autonomous
vehicles [17,24,46,105,125], they may not encapsulate the speci-
ficities of environments and sensing requirements intrinsic to guide
dog robots.
To bridge this gap, Park et al. [89] pioneered the development
of a dataset from cameras oriented from a pedestrian’s viewpoint.
More recent work [63,127] entailed large-scale multimodal sensor
data collected from a university campus environment using mo-
bile robots. Integrating such data with various learning methods,
such as learning-from-demonstration [92] and visual navigation
methods that employ self-supervised learning [64,99] and imitation
learning [2,103], could enable adept interpretation of contextual
cues for decision-making in robots. Sorokin et al. [103] proposed a
learning framework that uses knowledge learned from simulation
data and performs trajectory following with a quadruped robot
that avoids obstacles and remains on sidewalks for3.2km. Shah
et al. [99] similarly showed adaptability to a novel environment,
although requiring an hour of demonstration. More recently, with
the advent of Transformers [28,115], there has been research en-
abling zero-shot transfer for various computer vision tasks, such
as classification [91] and segmentation [68], opening possibilities
for perception models to adapt and respond appropriately in an
unseen environment. Notable progress includes enabling zero-shot
object goal navigation in simulated environments [129] and achiev-
ing long-horizon navigation without any fine-tuning in the target
environments [100].
However, these developments are primarily confined to simu-
lations or constrained systems, highlighting that extending these
capabilities to more generalized, real-world navigation scenarios
continues to be an active and challenging area of research. There-
fore, while progress in this field is encouraging [104], the capability
for autonomous navigation in diverse and unpredictable environ-
ments remains an active area of research and development. Also,
although there have been significant advancements in perception
models [19,61,117], safety-guaranteed real-world deployment has
not been accomplished yet. Common failures of object detection
such as missing objects (false negative) or detection of non-existent
objects (false positive), could potentially lead to hazardous situa-
tions (e.g., stopping in the middle of a street or failing to stop at
curbs). Prior research has explored using additional information
through sensor fusion and considering object properties and con-
text to reduce misclassifications [80]. In addition to the effort for
enhancing algorithm accuracy, leveraging multimodal data (e.g.,
visual and auditory) or human-in-the-loop systems would alleviate
the issues in perception to guarantee safe and reliable decision-
making.
As our findings in Section 4.1.2 suggest, using natural language
for scene descriptions can enhance the safe navigation of BLV peo-
ple. Recent advancements in large multimodal models [18,72,130]
that combine vision encoders with large language models (LLMs)
such as GPT-4, as well as open-source LLMs [22,110], have enabled
natural language scene descriptions at a level comparable to human-
level artificial general intelligence [16]. Specifically, these large
multimodal models process natural language prompts and visual
information to generate appropriate natural language responses.
This capability allows them to address queries such as “Is it safe
to cross the street?” or “Is this seat empty?” These technologies
are already being applied in vision-assistive mobile applications,
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
including OKO [7] and Be My Eyes [32]. Future research could pro-
ductively focus on tailoring perceptual models to deliver valuable
information to users [57] and integrating these systems into guide
dog robot applications.
5.1.5Communication Method.To address the limitations of unidi-
rectional communication from a handler to a guide dog, guide dog
robots need to relay pertinent information to users when necessary.
Audio feedback has been widely used for this purpose [48,49,73,74].
Yet, from our interviews, we learned the importance of moderating
the amount of audio feedback. H09 illustrated this concern, sharing
his experience with an electronic travel aid in an urban environ-
ment. He noted that excessive information can distract individuals
who are relying on their remaining senses, which also agrees with
the prior study on cognitive load [86].
In terms of communication from handlers to robots, there exists
merit in retaining traditional methods such as verbal cues and hand
gestures due to their proven efficacy over time. Audio interfaces for
command input, as explored in previous research [62,66,73,74],
present a natural and effective way to convey the handler’s inten-
tions.  However, their efficiency may wane in loud environments
where ambient sounds can obscure commands, when the handler
experiences vocal issues like a cold, or when conveying sensitive
commands, such as “find a restroom”, is not desirable. Given the
adaptability of robotic systems, considering alternative modes of
communication, such as haptic devices or button interfaces [58],
could offer more diverse ways to interact.
5.2  Towards Real-World Deployment Beyond
Development
To fill in the gap between the successful integration of the aforemen-
tioned guide dog design implications and real-world deployment,
we need to focus on establishing a strong bond between handlers
and guide dog robots, emphasizing two pivotal factors— trust and
personalization—tailored to handers’ preference that account for
their physical attributes and living environments.
We contend that trust building is a multifaceted process involv-
ing the reliability of the system and long-term partnership. For
instance, we found that trust in the handler-guide dog partnership
grows over time and experience through trial and error. We addi-
tionally argue that instilling a sense of agency [42,43,83] in users
towards the robot is crucial to cultivate trust, a concern frequently
raised regarding guide dog robots among the handlers. To estab-
lish trust, fully autonomous operation of guide dog robots, when
paired with users, may not be ideal [128], especially during the
initial interaction stages where trust bias may arise [41] and un-
expected robot behavior can diminish trust [78]. Similar to novice
guide dog handlers who initially lack trust in their guide dogs but
gradually develop strong bonds over time, we envision a parallel
trajectory for guide dog robots. As trust between handlers and their
guide dogs continues to develop and solidify, handlers become more
comfortable granting their guide dogs greater autonomy, even in
the presence of limited communication and interactions between
them, and of the occasional accidents that may occur during the
trust-building process. By mirroring this pattern in the human-
robot relationship, we open the door to opportunities for guide
dog robots to assume increasing autonomous navigation responsi-
bilities as the bond between the user and the robot matures. This
approach recognizes that trust is not an instantaneous outcome but
a dynamic process that grows over time with shared experiences
and a deepening sense of reliability. Therefore, as guide dog robots
become more familiar and integrated into the user’s life, they can
gradually assume greater autonomy in navigation tasks.
Personalization is essential to accommodate the diverse prefer-
ences of users with varying physical attributes and living environ-
ments [14,90]. Addressing these varying needs will pose a challenge
for a one-size-fits-all decision-making algorithm. For instance, the
preset stop criteria for toe-trip obstacles may incur safety issues
or inconvenience for users with limited balance who prefer the
robot to halt at every toe-trip obstacle or others who have more
agility and prefer to pass minor toe-trip obstacles, respectively. Al-
gorithms following the established practice (e.g., advancing to the
curb’s end before turning) may prove less efficient for individuals
with remaining visual function, as they possess a general sense of
when and where to make the turn before reaching the curb. Con-
versely, having the algorithm turn before reaching the curb may
pose safety concerns and impede orientation for individuals who
are totally blind. One potential solution to fulfill such a wide range
of personalization needs would be to utilize lifelong (or continual)
learning techniques [88]. This adaptive approach ensures that the
guide dog robot evolves to align with each user’s distinct require-
ments, ultimately enhancing the overall user experience and the
effectiveness of the robot as a mobility aid.
5.3  Limitations and Future Work
Our research efforts, while promising, come with inherent limi-
tations that deserve acknowledgment. It is important to note the
potential influence of participant bias in our findings, given the
diversity within our participant pool concerning vision levels, liv-
ing areas, age, and familiarity with technology. The majority of
participants were recruited from the United States except for one
participant from the Republic of Korea. However, we did not ob-
serve significant variances in the handler-guide dog interactions
between the two countries. Further research may be beneficial for a
comprehensive understanding of the nuances of handler-guide dog
interactions across different countries. Furthermore, the discussions
were drawn from interviews exclusively with guide dog handlers
and trainers who lack experience with guide dog robots. Engaging
guide dog robot developers and engineers in future research could
yield more comprehensive insights into the technological feasibility
and progression towards the envisioned goals of guide dog robots.
In light of these limitations, our research paves the way for sev-
eral directions of future work aimed at addressing the identified
challenges, validating our findings through user studies, exploring
personalization, investigating companionship between the handler-
guide dog unit, and contributing to the evolving field of trust in
human-robot interaction. First, it is essential to integrate the design
implications derived from our current research into the develop-
ment of our guide dog robot system. This will involve refining the
robot’s capabilities to ensure it can reliably guide the user on a
sidewalk having multiple obstacles including overhead obstacles
and co-designing the harness handle interface. This foundational
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
step will set the stage for more advanced interactions between the
handler and the guide dog robot during indoor and outdoor nav-
igation tasks in more complex environments. Second, it remains
crucial to establish objective measures of the robot’s performance
and its impact on users’ daily lives by conducting both controlled
and in situ user studies with BLV individuals. These future stud-
ies will enable us to gather measurements to evaluate our guide
dog robot and empirical data on trust and usability in real-world
scenarios. Third, we recognized the importance of personalization
in accommodating the unique needs and preferences of guide dog
handlers. To better understand these important factors, it is imper-
ative to conduct interviews with a diverse range of participants,
such as individuals having different vision levels, using different
types of mobility aids, and having additional disabilities, in order
to explore the nuances of personalization and tailor our system
accordingly. Fourth, our study primarily delved into interaction
dynamics related specifically to navigational tasks, leaving a gap
in our investigation regarding the companionship and emotional
support aspects lacking in guide dog robots. The benefits of com-
panionship and emotional support in the handler-animal guide dog
relationship are well-documented [118,120], a finding also evident
in our interviews. As future users of guide dog robots may have
the choice to adopt a dog as a pet or customize the guide dog robot
to offer companionship and emotional support [5,9,50], future re-
search in these areas seems pivotal. Finally, an important avenue for
future research lies in the broader themes related to human-robot
teaming and trust, as highlighted in previous studies [12,53,71].
These explorations will collectively contribute to our understand-
ing of the dynamics of human-robot teams and the development of
an effective guide dog robot.
6  CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a design implication for legged guide
dog robots that are actively being developed. Data from 23 guide
dog handlers and 5 trainers revealed limitations of the handler-
guide dog interaction, personalization aspects that are beyond the
official guide dog training regimen, and multifaceted perspectives
surrounding guide dog robots. These findings provide important
new insights and strongly advocate for the importance of our user-
driven design approach. Moreover, our findings emphasize the
significance of trust and personalization in achieving real-world
adoption, which is critical for future guide dog robot development.
Our study contributes valuable insights to the HCI and robotics
communities, advancing the prospect of an additional mobility
option tailored to the needs of BLV individuals.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors originally created the text and content, while ChatGPT
was used exclusively for refining the writing and checking the
grammar.
REFERENCES
[1]
Peter Ackland, Serge Resnikoff, and Rupert Bourne. 2017. World blindness and
visual impairment: despite many successes, the problem is growing.Community
eye health30, 100 (2017), 71.
[2]Bo Ai, Wei Gao, Vinay, and David Hsu. 2022.   Deep Visual Navigation un-
der  Partial  Observability.  In2022 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA)(Philadelphia, PA, USA). IEEE Press, 9439–9446.    https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICRA46639.2022.9811598
[3]  Aira. 2023.We’re Aira, a Visual Interpreting Service.https://aira.io/
[4]
Majed Al Zayer, Sam Tregillus, Jiwan Bhandari, Dave Feil-Seifer, and Eelke
Folmer. 2016. Exploring the use of a drone to guide blind runners. InProceed-
ings of the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and
Accessibility. 263–264.
[5]Rebecca Andreasson, Beatrice Alenljung, Erik Billing, and Robert Lowe. 2018.
Affective touch in human–robot interaction: conveying emotion to the Nao
robot.International Journal of Social Robotics10 (2018), 473–491.
[6]Mauro Avila Soto, Markus Funk, Matthias Hoppe, Robin Boldt, Katrin Wolf, and
Niels Henze. 2017. Dronenavigator: Using leashed and free-floating quadcopters
to navigate visually impaired travelers. InProceedings of the 19th international
acm sigaccess conference on computers and accessibility. 300–304.
[7]AYES. 2023.Meet oko | The AI-powered navigation app for all pedestrians.https:
//www.ayes.ai/
[8]Shiri Azenkot, Catherine Feng, and Maya Cakmak. 2016.  Enabling building
service robots to guide blind people a participatory design approach. In2016
11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE,
3–10.
[9]Annalena Nora Baecker, Denise Y Geiskkovitch, Adriana Lorena González, and
James E Young. 2020.  Emotional support domestic robots for healthy older
adults: Conversational prototypes to help with loneliness. InCompanion of the
2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. 122–124.
[10]Christie Bane. 2020.Forward Together: an inside look at guide dog training.
Independently published.
[11]Bruno Berberian, Jean-Christophe Sarrazin, Patrick Le Blaye, and Patrick Hag-
gard. 2012. Automation technology and sense of control: a window on human
agency.PloS one7, 3 (2012), e34075.
[12]
Deborah R Billings, Kristin E Schaefer, Jessie YC Chen, and Peter A Hancock.
2012. Human-robot interaction: developing trust in robots. InProceedings of the
seventh annual ACM/IEEE international conference on Human-Robot Interaction.
109–110.
[13]Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology.
Qualitative research in psychology3, 2 (2006), 77–101.
[14]Elizabeth Broadbent, Rebecca Stafford, and Bruce MacDonald. 2009. Acceptance
of healthcare robots for the older population: Review and future directions.
International journal of social robotics1 (2009), 319–330.
[15]
Emeline Brulé, Brianna J Tomlinson, Oussama Metatla, Christophe Jouffrais,
and Marcos Serrano. 2020.  Review of quantitative empirical evaluations of
technology for people with visual impairments. InProceedings of the 2020 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–14.
[16]Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric
Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al.
2023.  Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712(2023).
[17]Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong,
Qiang Xu, Anush Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. 2020.
nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving. InProceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 11621–11631.
[18]
Jun Chen, Deyao Zhu1 Xiaoqian Shen1 Xiang Li, Zechun Liu2 Pengchuan
Zhang, Raghuraman Krishnamoorthi2 Vikas Chandra2 Yunyang Xiong, and
Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2023.   MINIGPT-V2: LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL AS
A UNIFIED INTERFACE FOR VISION-LANGUAGE MULTI-TASK LEARNING.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09478(2023).
[19]
Liang-Chieh  Chen,  Yukun  Zhu,  George  Papandreou,  Florian  Schroff,  and
Hartwig Adam. 2018.   Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution
for semantic image segmentation. InProceedings of the European conference on
computer vision (ECCV). 801–818.
[20]Qihe Chen, Luyao Wang, Yan Zhang, ZiangL Li, Tingmin Yan, Fan Wang, Guyue
Zhou, and Jiangtao Gong. 2022. Can Quadruped Navigation Robots be Used as
Guide Dogs?arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.08727(2022).
[21]Yanbo Chen, Zhengzhe Xu, Zhuozhu Jian, Gengpan Tang, Liyunong Yang,
Anxing Xiao, Xueqian Wang, and Bin Liang. 2023. Quadruped guidance robot
for the visually impaired: A comfort-based approach. In2023 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 12078–12084.
[22]Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang,
Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion
Stoica, and Eric P. Xing. 2023.  Vicuna: An Open-Source Chatbot Impressing
GPT-4 with 90%* ChatGPT Quality.   https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/
[23]DD Clark-Carter, AD Heyes, and CI Howarth. 1986. The efficiency and walking
speed of visually impaired people.Ergonomics29, 6 (1986), 779–789.
[24]
Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus
Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. 2016.
The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. InProceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 3213–3223.
[25]Peter J Craigon, Pru Hobson-West, Gary CW England, Chantelle Whelan, Emma
Lethbridge, and Lucy Asher. 2017.  “She’s a dog at the end of the day”: Guide
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
dog owners’ perspectives on the behaviour of their guide dog.PloS one12, 4
(2017), e0176018.
[26]  daglo. 2023.daglo - Never Miss a Word.  https://daglo.ai/
[27]
David DeFazio, Eisuke Hirota, and Shiqi Zhang. 2023. Seeing-Eye Quadruped
Navigation with Force Responsive Locomotion Control. In7th Annual Conference
on Robot Learning.
[28]
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn,
Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer,
Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al.2020.   An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition at scale.arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929
(2020).
[29]Brian L Due. 2023. Guide dog versus robot dog: assembling visually impaired
people with non-human agents and achieving assisted mobility through dis-
tributed co-constructed perception.Mobilities18, 1 (2023), 148–166.
[30]Boston Dynamics. [n. d.].Home - Bostondynamics.  Retrieved July 25, 2023 from
https://bostondynamics.com
[31]Stephen Eick and Annie I Antón. 2020.   Enhancing privacy in robotics via
judicious sensor selection. In2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 7156–7165.
[32]Be My Eyes. 2023.Be My Eyes - See the world together.  https://www.bemyeyes.
com/
[33]
International Guide Dog Federation. 2023. History of Guide Dogs - International
Guide Dog Federation.   https://www.igdf.org.uk/guide-dogs/history-of-guide-
dogs/
[34]Catherine Feng, Shiri Azenkot, and Maya Cakmak. 2015.  Designing a robot
guide for blind people in indoor environments. InProceedings of the Tenth
Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction Extended
Abstracts. 107–108.
[35]Clovernook Center for the Blind. 2023. Guide Dogs: Your Questions Answered
– Clovernook.   https://clovernook.org/2021/09/22/guide-dogs-your-questions-
answered/
[36]
Canadian Guide Dogs for the Blind. 2023.Realities of Guide Dog Mobility –
Canadian Guide Dogs for the Blind.  https://www.guidedogs.ca/realities-guide-
dog-mobility
[37]
Guiding Eyes for the Blind. 2023.Guide Dogs 101 - Guiding Eyes for the Blind.
https://www.guidingeyes.org/guide-dogs-101/
[38]
Guiding Eyes for the Blind. 2023.  Who We Are - Guiding Eyes for the Blind.
https://www.guidingeyes.org/who-we-are/
[39]
The Carroll Center for the blind. 2023.The Carroll Center for the Blind.  https:
//carroll.org/
[40]
Guide   Dog   Foundation.   2023.Characteristics  for  Success.https:
//www.guidedog.org/gd/get-a-guide-dog/characteristics-for-success/gd/dog-
programs/characteristics-for-success.aspx?hkey=504cd63e-30d8-4f1e-a533-
8c4955f49313
[41]Amos Freedy, Ewart DeVisser, Gershon Weltman, and Nicole Coeyman. 2007.
Measurement of trust in human-robot collaboration. In2007 International sym-
posium on collaborative technologies and systems. Ieee, 106–114.
[42]Shaun Gallagher. 2000. Philosophical conceptions of the self: implications for
cognitive science.Trends in cognitive sciences4, 1 (2000), 14–21.
[43]Shaun Gallagher. 2012. Multiple aspects in the sense of agency.New ideas in
psychology30, 1 (2012), 15–31.
[44]Florence Gaunet and Sandie Besse. 2019. Guide dogs’ navigation after a single
journey: A descriptive study of path reproduction, homing, shortcut and detour.
PLoS One14, 7 (2019), e0219816.
[45]Guide Dog Users Inc. (GDUI). 2023.GDUI School Surveys - Guide Dog Users, Inc.
(GDUI).  https://guidedogusersinc.org/resources/gdui-school-survey/
[46]Jakob Geyer, Yohannes Kassahun, Mentar Mahmudi, Xavier Ricou, Rupesh
Durgesh, Andrew S Chung, Lorenz Hauswald, Viet Hoang Pham, Maximilian
Mühlegg, Sebastian Dorn, et al.2020. A2d2: Audi autonomous driving dataset.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06320(2020).
[47]Nicholas A Giudice and Gordon E Legge. 2008. Blind navigation and the role of
technology.The engineering handbook of smart technology for aging, disability,
and independence8 (2008), 479–500.
[48]Cole Gleason, Alexander J Fiannaca, Melanie Kneisel, Edward Cutrell, and
Meredith Ringel Morris. 2018. FootNotes: Geo-referenced audio annotations for
nonvisual exploration.Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable
and Ubiquitous Technologies2, 3 (2018), 1–24.
[49]João Guerreiro, Daisuke Sato, Saki Asakawa, Huixu Dong, Kris M Kitani, and
Chieko Asakawa. 2019. Cabot: Designing and evaluating an autonomous nav-
igation robot for blind people. InProceedings of the 21st International ACM
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility. 68–82.
[50]Shihui Guo, Lishuang Zhan, Yancheng Cao, Chen Zheng, Guyue Zhou, and
Jiangtao Gong. 2023.  Touch-and-Heal: Data-driven Affective Computing in
Tactile Interaction with Robotic Dog.Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive,
Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies7, 2 (2023), 1–33.
[51]Patrick Haggard and Manos Tsakiris. 2009. The experience of agency: Feelings,
judgments, and responsibility.Current Directions in Psychological Science18, 4
(2009), 242–246.
[52]Kaveh Akbari Hamed, Vinay R Kamidi, Wen-Loong Ma, Alexander Leonessa,
and Aaron D Ames. 2019. Hierarchical and safe motion control for cooperative
locomotion of robotic guide dogs and humans: A hybrid systems approach.IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters5, 1 (2019), 56–63.
[53]Peter A Hancock, Deborah R Billings, Kristin E Schaefer, Jessie YC Chen, Ewart J
De Visser, and Raja Parasuraman. 2011.  A meta-analysis of factors affecting
trust in human-robot interaction.Human factors53, 5 (2011), 517–527.
[54]Elliott Hauser, Yao-Cheng Chan, Parth Chonkar, Geethika Hemkumar, Huihai
Wang, Daksh Dua, Shikhar Gupta, Efren Mendoza Enriquez, Tiffany Kao, Justin
Hart, et al.2023. "What’s That Robot Doing Here?": Perceptions Of Incidental
Encounters With Autonomous Quadruped Robots. InProceedings of the First
International Symposium on Trustworthy Autonomous Systems. 1–15.
[55]
Marion A Hersh and Michael A Johnson. 2010. A robotic guide for blind people.
Part 1. A multi-national survey of the attitudes, requirements and preferences
of potential end-users.Applied Bionics and Biomechanics7, 4 (2010), 277–288.
[56]Bin Hong, Zhangxi Lin, Xin Chen, Jing Hou, Shunya Lv, and Zhendong Gao.
2022. Development and application of key technologies for Guide Dog Robot:
A systematic literature review.Robotics and Autonomous Systems154 (2022),
104104.
[57]Karst MP Hoogsteen, Sarit Szpiro, Gabriel Kreiman, and Eli Peli. 2022. Beyond
the cane: describing urban scenes to blind people for mobility tasks.ACM
Transactions on Accessible Computing (TACCESS)15, 3 (2022), 1–29.
[58]Hochul  Hwang,  Tim  Xia,  Ibrahima  Keita,  Ken  Suzuki,  Joydeep  Biswas,
Sunghoon I Lee, and Donghyun Kim. 2023.   System configuration and nav-
igation of a guide dog robot: Toward animal guide dog-level guiding work. In
2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
9778–9784.
[59]
Jemin Hwangbo, Joonho Lee, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Dario Bellicoso, Vassilios
Tsounis, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. 2019. Learning agile and dynamic
motor skills for legged robots.Science Robotics4, 26 (2019), eaau5872.
[60]
Watthanasak Jeamwatthanachai, Mike Wald, and Gary Wills. 2019.   Indoor
navigation by blind people: Behaviors and challenges in unfamiliar spaces and
buildings.British Journal of Visual Impairment37, 2 (2019), 140–153.
[61]Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, and Jing Qiu. 2023.YOLO by Ultralytics.  https:
//github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics
[62]S Kalpana, S Rajagopalan, R Ranjith, and R Gomathi. 2020. Voice recognition
based multi robot for blind people using lidar sensor. In2020 International
Conference on System, Computation, Automation and Networking (ICSCAN). IEEE,
1–6.
[63]Haresh Karnan, Anirudh Nair, Xuesu Xiao, Garrett Warnell, Sören Pirk, Alexan-
der Toshev, Justin Hart, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone. 2022. Socially compli-
ant navigation dataset (scand): A large-scale dataset of demonstrations for social
navigation.IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters7, 4 (2022), 11807–11814.
[64]
Haresh Karnan, Elvin Yang, Daniel Farkash, Garrett Warnell, Joydeep Biswas,
and Peter Stone. 2023.   STERLING: Self-Supervised Terrain Representation
Learning from Unconstrained Robot Experience. In7th Annual Conference on
Robot Learning.
[65]Donghyun Kim, Jared Di Carlo, Benjamin Katz, Gerardo Bledt, and Sangbae
Kim. 2019.  Highly dynamic quadruped locomotion via whole-body impulse
control and model predictive control.arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06586(2019).
[66]
J Taery Kim, Wenhao Yu, Yash Kothari, Jie Tan, Greg Turk, and Sehoon Ha.
2023. Transforming a Quadruped into a Guide Robot for the Visually Impaired:
Formalizing Wayfinding, Interaction Modeling, and Safety Mechanism.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.14055(2023).
[67]J Taery Kim, Wenhao Yu, Jie Tan, Greg Turk, and Sehoon Ha. 2023. How to Train
Your Guide Dog: Wayfinding and Safe Navigation with Human-Robot Modeling.
InCompanion of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction. 221–225.
[68]Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura
Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al.
2023. Segment anything.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02643(2023).
[69]Masaki Kuribayashi, Tatsuya Ishihara, Daisuke Sato, Jayakorn Vongkulbhisal,
Karnik Ram, Seita Kayukawa, Hironobu Takagi, Shigeo Morishima, and Chieko
Asakawa. 2023. PathFinder: Designing a Map-less Navigation System for Blind
People in Unfamiliar Buildings. InProceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–16.
[70]Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning.nature
521, 7553 (2015), 436–444.
[71]
Michael Lewis, Katia Sycara, and Phillip Walker. 2018.   The role of trust in
human-robot interaction.Foundations of trusted autonomy(2018), 135–159.
[72]Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023.   Visual
instruction tuning.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08485(2023).
[73]
Shuijing  Liu,  Aamir  Hasan,  Kaiwen  Hong,  Runxuan  Wang,  Peixin  Chang,
Zachary  Mizrachi,  Justin  Lin,  D  Livingston  McPherson,  Wendy  A  Rogers,
and Katherine Driggs-Campbell. 2023.   DRAGON: A Dialogue-Based Robot
for Assistive Navigation with Visual Language Grounding.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.06924(2023).
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
[74]Shuijing Liu, Aamir Hasan, Kaiwen Hong, Chun-Kai Yao, Justin Lin, Weihang
Liang, Megan A Bayles, Wendy A Rogers, and Katherine Driggs-Campbell. 2023.
Designing a Wayfinding Robot for People with Visual Impairments.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.09144(2023).
[75]Janice KF Lloyd, Steven La Grow, Kevin J Stafford, and R Claire Budge. 2008. The
guide dog as a mobility aid part 1: Perceived effectiveness on travel performance.
Vision Rehabilitation International1, 1 (2008), 17–33.
[76]Janice KF Lloyd, Steven La Grow, Kevin J Stafford, and R Claire Budge. 2008.
The guide dog as a mobility aid part 2: Perceived changes to travel habits.Vision
Rehabilitation International1, 1 (2008), 34–45.
[77]Richard G Long and Nicholas A Giudice. 2010. Establishing and Maintaining
Orientation for Mobility. (2010).
[78]
Joseph B Lyons, Izz aldin Hamdan, and Thy Q Vo. 2023.   Explanations and
trust: What happens to trust when a robot partner does something unexpected?
Computers in Human Behavior138 (2023), 107473.
[79]Kelly Mack, Emma McDonnell, Dhruv Jain, Lucy Lu Wang, Jon E. Froehlich,
and Leah Findlater. 2021.   What do we mean by “accessibility research”? A
literature survey of accessibility papers in CHI and ASSETS from 1994 to 2019.
InProceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
1–18.
[80]Yanmao Man, Raymond Muller, Ming Li, Z Berkay Celik, and Ryan Gerdes. 2023.
That person moves like a car: Misclassification attack detection for autonomous
systems using spatiotemporal consistency. InUSENIX Security.
[81]Fanny Menuge, Míriam Marcet-Rius, Muriel Jochem, Orane François, Camille
Assali, Camille Chabaud, Eva Teruel, Justine Guillemot, and Patrick Pageat. 2021.
Early evaluation of fearfulness in future guide dogs for blind people.Animals
11, 2 (2021), 412.
[82]
Rachel Joy-Taub Miner. 2001.  The experience of living with and using a dog
guide.RE: view32, 4 (2001), 183.
[83]
James W Moore. 2016.  What is the sense of agency and why does it matter?
Frontiers in psychology7 (2016), 1272.
[84]
Guide Dogs of America. 2023.How to Get a Service Dog - Guide Dogs of America.
https://www.guidedogsofamerica.org/admissions/
[85]Bay State Council of the Blind. 2022.Bay State Council of the Blind.   https:
//acbofma.org/
[86]Sabrina A Panëels, Adriana Olmos, Jeffrey R Blum, and Jeremy R Cooperstock.
2013. Listen to it yourself ! evaluating usability of what’s around me? for the
blind. InProceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 2107–2116.
[87]  Naver Papago. 2023.Papago.  https://papago.naver.com/
[88]
German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan
Wermter. 2019.  Continual lifelong learning with neural networks: A review.
Neural networks113 (2019), 54–71.
[89]
Kibaek Park, Youngtaek Oh, Soomin Ham, Kyungdon Joo, Hyokyoung Kim,
Hyoyoung Kum, and In So Kweon. 2020.   Sideguide: a large-scale sidewalk
dataset for guiding impaired people. In2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 10022–10029.
[90]Joelle Pineau, Michael Montemerlo, Martha Pollack, Nicholas Roy, and Sebastian
Thrun. 2003.  Towards robotic assistants in nursing homes: Challenges and
results.Robotics and autonomous systems42, 3-4 (2003), 271–281.
[91]
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sand-
hini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al.
2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision.
InInternational conference on machine learning. PMLR, 8748–8763.
[92]Harish Ravichandar, Athanasios S Polydoros, Sonia Chernova, and Aude Billard.
2020. Recent advances in robot learning from demonstration.Annual review of
control, robotics, and autonomous systems3 (2020), 297–330.
[93]K Refson, AJ Jackson, AE Dusoir, and DB Archer. 1999. The health and social
status of guide dog owners and other visually impaired adults in Scotland.Visual
Impairment Research1, 2 (1999), 95–109.
[94]Jillian M Rickly, Nigel Halpern, Marcus Hansen, and John Welsman. 2021. Trav-
elling with a Guide Dog: Experiences of People with Vision Impairment.Sus-
tainability13, 5 (2021), 2840.
[95]Unitree   Robotics.   2023.Unitree  Go2  (Pre-order)  –  UnitreeRobotics.
https://shop.unitree.com/collections/frontpage/products/unitree-
go2?variant=45119174377705
[96]Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 2000.1917.120 - Fixed stairways.
| Occupational Safety and Health Administration.  https://www.osha.gov/laws-
regs/regulations/standardnumber/1917/1917.120
[97]
Katherine Standish Schneider. 2005.  Practice Report: The Winding Valley of
Grief: When a Dog Guide Retires or Dies.Journal of Visual Impairment &
Blindness99, 6 (2005), 368–370.
[98]
Social Security. 2010.Social Security Act §1614.  https://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/
ssact/title16b/1614.htm
[99]Dhruv Shah, Benjamin Eysenbach, Gregory Kahn, Nicholas Rhinehart, and
Sergey Levine. 2021. Ving: Learning open-world navigation with visual goals.
In2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
13215–13222.
[100]Dhruv Shah, Błażej Osiński, Sergey Levine, et al.2023. Lm-nav: Robotic naviga-
tion with large pre-trained models of language, vision, and action. InConference
on Robot Learning. PMLR, 492–504.
[101]
Ben Shneiderman, Catherine Plaisant, Maxine Cohen, Steven Jacobs, Niklas
Elmqvist, and Nicholas Diakopoulos. 2016.Designing the user interface: strategies
for effective human-computer interaction. Pearson.
[102]
Patrick Slade, Arjun Tambe, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. 2021.   Multimodal
sensing and intuitive steering assistance improve navigation and mobility for
people with impaired vision.Science robotics6, 59 (2021), eabg6594.
[103]Maks Sorokin, Jie Tan, C Karen Liu, and Sehoon Ha. 2022. Learning to navigate
sidewalks in outdoor environments.IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters7, 2
(2022), 3906–3913.
[104]
Ajay Sridhar, Dhruv Shah, Catherine Glossop, and Sergey Levine. 2023. NoMaD:
Goal Masked Diffusion Policies for Navigation and Exploration.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.07896(2023).
[105]Pei Sun, Henrik Kretzschmar, Xerxes Dotiwalla, Aurelien Chouard, Vijaysai
Patnaik, Paul Tsui, James Guo, Yin Zhou, Yuning Chai, Benjamin Caine, et al.
2020. Scalability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
2446–2454.
[106]Susumu Tachi, Kiyoshi Komoriya, et al.1984.  Guide dog robot.Autonomous
mobile robots: Control, planning, and architecture(1984), 360–367.
[107]Susumu Tachi, Kazuo Tanie, K Komoriya, Yuji Hosoda, and Minoru Abe. 1978.
Study of guide dog (seeing eye) robot (I).Bulletin of Mechanical Engineering
Laboratory (Japan)32 (1978).
[108]  The University of Tokyo Tachi Laboratory. 2023.Tachi_Lab - Guide Dog Robot
(MELDOG).  https://tachilab.org/en/projects/meldog.html
[109]
Haobin Tan, Chang Chen, Xinyu Luo, Jiaming Zhang, Constantin Seibold, Kailun
Yang, and Rainer Stiefelhagen. 2021. Flying guide dog: Walkable path discovery
for the visually impaired utilizing drones and transformer-based semantic seg-
mentation. In2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics
(ROBIO). IEEE, 1123–1128.
[110]Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne
Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, et al.2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971(2023).
[111]
Puppy In Training. 2017.   How Much Does A Guide Dog Cost?https://
puppyintraining.com/how-much-does-a-guide-dog-cost/
[112]
Michael Tucker. 1984.Eyes That Lead: The Story of Guide Dogs for the Blind(1st.
ed.). Howell Book House.
[113]
Iwan Ulrich and Johann Borenstein. 2001.  The GuideCane-applying mobile
robot technologies to assist the visually impaired.IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics-Part A: Systems and Humans31, 2 (2001), 131–136.
[114]
Rohit Varma, Thasarat S Vajaranant, Bruce Burkemper, Shuang Wu, Mina Torres,
Chunyi Hsu, Farzana Choudhury, and Roberta McKean-Cowdin. 2016. Visual
impairment and blindness in adults in the United States: demographic and
geographic variations from 2015 to 2050.JAMA ophthalmology134, 7 (2016),
802–809.
[115]
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you
need.Advances in neural information processing systems30 (2017).
[116]Mohd Helmy Abd Wahab, Amirul A Talib, Herdawatie A Kadir, Ayob Johari,
Ahmad Noraziah, Roslina M Sidek, and Ariffin A Mutalib. 2011.  Smart cane:
Assistive cane for visually-impaired people.arXiv preprint arXiv:1110.5156
(2011).
[117]
Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu,
Kriti Aggarwal, Owais Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, et al.
2023.  Image as a Foreign Language: BEiT Pretraining for Vision and Vision-
Language Tasks. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 19175–19186.
[118]Lorraine Whitmarsh. 2005. The benefits of guide dog ownership.Visual impair-
ment research7, 1 (2005), 27–42.
[119]William R Wiener, Richard L Welsh, and Bruce B Blasch. 2010.Foundations of
orientation and mobility. Vol. 1. American Foundation for the Blind.
[120]Cindy Wiggett-Barnard and Henry Steel. 2008.  The experience of owning a
guide dog.Disability and Rehabilitation30, 14 (2008), 1014–1026.
[121]Michele A Williams, Amy Hurst, and Shaun K Kane. 2013.  " Pray before you
step out" describing personal and situational blind navigation behaviors. In
Proceedings of the 15th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers
and Accessibility. 1–8.
[122]Mei Ling Wong. 2006.Perceptions of guide dog users on their dogs’ impact on
their lives. Ph. D. Dissertation. Pacific University Stockton, CA, USA.
[123]
Anxing Xiao, Wenzhe Tong, Lizhi Yang, Jun Zeng, Zhongyu Li, and Koushil
Sreenath. 2021.  Robotic guide dog: Leading a human with leash-guided hy-
brid physical interaction. In2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 11470–11476.
[124]Xiaomi. [n. d.].Xiaomi United States.Retrieved July 25, 2023 from https:
//www.mi.com/us
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
[125]Fisher Yu, Haofeng Chen, Xin Wang, Wenqi Xian, Yingying Chen, Fangchen
Liu, Vashisht Madhavan, and Trevor Darrell. 2020. Bdd100k: A diverse driving
dataset for heterogeneous multitask learning. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2636–2645.
[126]Limin Zeng, Björn Einert, Alexander Pitkin, and Gerhard Weber. 2018. Hapti-
crein: Design and development of an interactive haptic rein for a guidance robot.
InComputers Helping People with Special Needs: 16th International Conference,
ICCHP 2018, Linz, Austria, July 11-13, 2018, Proceedings, Part II 16. Springer,
94–101.
[127]Arthur Zhang, Chaitanya Eranki, Christina Zhang, Ji-Hwan Park, Raymond
Hong, Pranav Kalyani, Lochana Kalyanaraman, Arsh Gamare, Arnav Bagad,
Maria Esteva, and Joydeep Biswas. 2023.  Towards Robust Robot 3D Percep-
tion in Urban Environments: The UT Campus Object Dataset.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.13549(2023).
[128]Yan Zhang, Ziang Li, Haole Guo, Luyao Wang, Qihe Chen, Wenjie Jiang, Ming-
ming Fan, Guyue Zhou, and Jiangtao Gong. 2023. "I am the follower, also the
boss": Exploring Different Levels of Autonomy and Machine Forms of Guiding
Robots for the Visually Impaired. InProceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–22.
[129]Qianfan Zhao, Lu Zhang, Bin He, Hong Qiao, and Zhiyong Liu. 2023. Zero-shot
object goal visual navigation. In2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2025–2031.
[130]Deyao Zhu, Jun Chen, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. 2023.
MiniGPT-4: Enhancing Vision-Language Understanding with Advanced Large
Language Models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10592(2023).
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
A  GUIDE DOG EVALUATION
Guide dogs are comprehensively evaluated to become "class-ready"
guide dogs. We have categorized the evaluation components ac-
quired from the Guide Dog Users, Inc. (GDUI) School Survey Sum-
mary and presented them in Table 3.
B  GUIDE DOG USERS, INC. (GDUI) SCHOOL
SURVEY SUMMARY
The Guide Dog Users, Inc. (GDUI) School Survey Summary contains
information about the expected range of services provided by guide
dogs that have completed formal training at various guide dog
schools. We compiled the data which is displayed in Table 4.
Towards Robotic Companions: Understanding Handler-Guide Dog Interactions for Informed Guide Dog Robot DesignCHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Table 3: Final testing components - Guide dog evaluation metric
Task title   Evaluation components
ObedienceRespond to basic obedience commands
Reliably come when called while off-leash
Guide workWork in a variety of street crossing settings
Work in a variety of street crossing settings
Trained in urban, suburbia (small towns), and rural environments
Reliably stop at changes in elevation, i.e., steps, curbs, and drop-offs
Reliably avoid or indicate obstacles
Reliably avoid or indicate overhead obstacles
Reliably turn left, right, or move forward on the hand signal from the handler
Reliably turn left, right, or move forward on the verbal command of the handler
Enter, exit, and ride quietly in passenger cars or other vehicles
Enter, exit, and ride quietly on buses
Enter, exit, and ride quietly on subways, light rail systems, or passenger trains
and safely navigate elevated platforms
Exposed to security checkpoints such as those found in airports
BuildingsRide escalators
Safely navigate revolving doors with their handler
Work in environments such as university campuses or shopping malls
where there are multiple locations that must be accessed via nonlinear pathways
TrafficWork safely in traffic
Safely negotiate “traffic checks”
Disobey the handler’s commands when it would be unsafe to comply (intelligent disobedience)
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USAHwang, et al.
Table 4: Guide dog’s assured ability upon completion of formal training
Q: Upon completion of formal training, clients can be assured that a dog from your program
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
will be house broken
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will have been trained to behave well in public, e.g. no barking or stealing food
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will exhibit no aggression toward people or other animals
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will respond to basic obedience commands
✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓
will disobey the handler’s commands when it would be unsafe to comply (intelligent disobedience)
✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to work safely in traffic
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to safely negotiate “traffic checks”
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to work in a variety of street crossing settings
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✗
will be trained to reliably stop at changes in elevation, i.e. steps, curbs and drop-offs
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to reliably avoid or indicate obstacles
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to reliably avoid or indicate overhead obstacles
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to reliably turn left, right or to move forward on the hand signal from the handler
✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to reliably turn left, right or to move forward on the verbal command of the handler
✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to ride escalators
✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to follow members of the public when commanded to do so by the handler
✗✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to enter, exit and ride quietly in passenger cars or other vehicles
✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓
will be trained to enter, exit and ride quietly on buses
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to enter, exit and ride quietly on light rail systems or passenger trains
and to safely navigate elevated platforms
✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓
will have been exposed to security checkpoints such as those found in airports
✓✓✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✗✓✓
will have been trained in urban environments
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will have been trained in small towns or suburbia
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will have been trained in rural environments
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will have been trained to guide safely along roads with no sidewalks or footpaths
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will have been trained to work in environments such as university campuses or shopping malls
where there are multiple locations which must be accessed via nonlinear pathways
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to reliably retrieve dropped items for the handler
✗✗✓✗✗✗✗✗✓✗✓✗
will be trained to locate some specific objects/landmarks on command
✓✓✓✗✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to reliably come when called while off leash
✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓✓
will be trained to formally guide on leash
✗✗✗✗✓✗✗✗✓✗✓✗
Order of the organizations is random.