Does My Dog “Speak” Like Me? The Acoustic Correlation between Pet Dogs and
Their Human Owners
Jieyi Huang
1
, Chunhao Zhang
2
, Yufei Wang
3
, Mengyue Wu
4
, Kenny Zhu
5*
1,2,3,4
Shanghai Jiao Tong Univerisity
5
The University of Texas at Arlington
1
xsiling1@gmail.com,
2
forest_zch@sjtu.edu.cn,
3
arthur-w@sjtu.edu.cn
4
wumengyue@cs.sjtu.edu.cn,
5
kenny.zhu@uta.edu
Abstract
How hosts language influence their pets’ vocalization is an
interesting yet underexplored problem. This paper presents a
preliminary investigation into the possible correlation between
domestic dog vocal expressions and their human host’s lan-
guage environment. We first present a new dataset of Shiba Inu
dog vocals from YouTube, which provides 7500 clean sound
clips, including their contextual information of these vocals
and their owner’s speech clips with a carefully-designed data
processing pipeline. The contextual information includes the
scene category in which the vocal was recorded, the dog’s
location and activity. With a classification task and prominent
factor analysis, we discover significant acoustic differences
in the dog vocals from the two language environments. We
further identify some acoustic features from dog vocalizations
that are potentially correlated to their host language patterns
1
.
1    Introduction
Understanding animals’ verbal expressions is an interesting
interdisciplinary scientific challenge. This is particular true
with pet dogs, who closely interact with humans. Previous
research endeavors to comprehend dog vocal sounds for a
number of reasons, such as for a better understanding of
animal biological evolution (Pongrácz 2017), applying their
language to information technology, or just curiosity about
dogs’ intention when they make a sound (Pongrácz et al.
2011; Jégh-Czinege, Faragó, and Pongrácz 2020). However,
this task is challenging not only due to the unknown acoustic
pattern of dogs but also the lack of a suitable and high-quality
dataset.
Previous researchers have demonstrated that a dog’s vocal-
ization indeed reflects their individual characteristics (Pon-
grácz, Molnár, and Miklósi 2010; Larranaga et al. 2015),
emotional expression (Thorndike and Bruce 2017; Hantke,
Cummins, and Schuller 2018; Paladini 2020) and percep-
tion of outside world (Larranaga et al. 2015; Molnár et al.
2008). However, despite the fact that dogs are human’s most
familiar animals, little research has looked into the influence
on dogs’ communication arising from their interaction with
human hosts. As a matter of fact, dogs exhibit many modes of
communication ranging from behavioural patterns to vocal-
izations, in this paper we pay attention to their vocal sounds,
1
The  data,  code  and  a  live  demo  are  available  at  https://
anonymous.4open.science/r/EJSHIBAVOICE-0DC5.
which serve as one of the most important communication
channels (Siniscalchi et al. 2018). In our work, we hypothe-
size that a dog’s acoustic characteristics may be correlated
with such interaction, particularly the host’s spoken language.
To verify that, we explore the vocal difference of a particular
dog breed (Shiba Inu) from two different host language envi-
ronments (English vs. Japanese) (Figure 1). Shiba Inu dogs
are chosen as the subject of this study because Shiba Inus are
very popular among dog owners and there is an abundance of
their audio/video resources available online. Moreover, we
choose to work on dogs in English and Japanese language
environments because these two widely-spoken languages
have very different phonetic systems, and at the same time,
Shiba Inu dogs are very popular in both Japanese and English-
speaking households (i.e., in Japan and in the US).
One may argue that the host language is not the only factor
that might influence how dogs sound in the online videos.
For example, social norms and customs play also play apart
in these countries/cultures. We believe these factors are inter-
related with the languages that are in question in this paper.
Having correlation between dog vocals and human speeches
does not nullify the correlation between dog vocals and social
norms and cultural behaviors, and vice versa. In fact, these
two kinds of correlations can strengthen each other.
Figure 1: A dog’s vocalization may be accousticly correlated
with its host language, so that a “Japanese” dog should vo-
calize differently than an “American” dog under the same
context such as “eating on the lawn”.
We verify the above hypothesis via a two-stage pipeline.
First, we conduct classification experiments to investigate
the possible existence of interesting acoustic properties that
distinguish dog vocalizations from one language environment
arXiv:2309.13085v1  [cs.SD]  21 Sep 2023
to the other. The classification experiment is performed on
pairs of Japanese and English dog vocal clips under the same
contextwhich is composed of thescene category,location,
andactivityof the dog during the recording, so as to exclude
these confounding non-linguistic factors, which may affect
how dogs voice out.
In stage two, to discover the most prominent factors that
distinguish dog vocals by their language environments, we
perform an importance analysis of different factors using
Shapley values. A similar analysis is also performed on host
languages, to study the acoustic difference between English
and Japanese. Moreover, we compute the Pearson correlation
between dog vocals and their host speech. The fact that sev-
eral most important acoustic characteristics differentiating
dogs have substantial correlations with those of their host
language (i.e., English or Japanese) supports our hypothesis
that the domestic dog vocal expressions do share a few acous-
tic similarities with its host language. It is possible that the
host language environment has an influence over the dog’s
vocalization.
Previous dog vocalization datasets are mostly collected
under controlled evironment, i.e. the researchers raised sev-
eral dogs and recorded their physical as well as vocal be-
haviours (Ide et al. 2021; Ehsani et al. 2018; Molnár et al.
2008; Hantke, Cummins, and Schuller 2018). However, such
data acquisition methods are not only costly but also lack-
ing generalization capability as the number of dogs is highly
restricted. Since webly data provides a large amount of dog
vocalizations with plenty of metadata featuring the dog breed,
language environment and contextual information, we de-
rive a pipeline to obtain and filter the vocals from social
media, leading to a large-scale of dog vocalization dataset
“EJShibaVoice”. The number of families for Japanese and
English respectively stand at 219 and 275, much larger than
any other similar studies previously reported. Moreover, we
use the context information tagged with the vocal clips to
eliminate the confounding factors in our experiments. Specif-
ically, we develop a framework that crawls Shiba Inu audio
clips from both English and Japanese-speaking host families,
extracts the vocal clips, segments the clips into contiguous
singular sounds, and tags them with contextual information.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
•A newly-defined task to uncover the human linguistic
influence  on  the  vocal  expressions  of  domestic  Shiba
Inu dogs via a unique data-driven and computational ap-
proach, which can inspire further research on animal lan-
guages. (Section 2)
•
We construct a large-scale Shiba Inu vocalization dataset
EJShibaVoicecontaining clean audio clips produced by
dogs from two different language environments: English
and  Japanese,  including  dogs’  host  speech  clips.  The
dog vocal and human speech data undergo a systematic
pipeline, which extracts clean dog voices and the corre-
sponding host speech from the social media videos. (Sec-
tion 2)
•We discover prominent acoustic differences between dogs
from different language environments: Shiba Inus vocal-
izations from English-speaking households have alower
frequency, while those from Japanese environments have
faster speed, which correlates with these two human lan-
guages, respectively. (Section 4.1)
2    Problem and Dataset
In this paper, we ask two research questions:
1.Do pet dogs from different human language environments
sound differently?
2.
If so, is their vocalization related to their host’s language
in any way?
To   answer   these   questions,   we   construct   a   dataset
“EJShibaVoice”, which is composed of Shiba Inu vocal sam-
ples from Japanese and English language environments and
their corresponding hosts speech. Additionally, each audio
sample is also tagged with metadata such as the begin and
end timestamps, and the context under which the vocal sound
is made. Additionally, host’s speech from the same video is
extracted using a similar approach as we process dog vocal-
izations. This procedure will be described in detail in Section
2.4.
To ensure the high quality of the dataset, we develop a
rigorous processing pipeline to extract pure dog sounds in a
variety of environments, with little or no extraneous noises
such as human speech or background music. We segment
dog audio clips into minimal units, which is a full singular
bark, for the purpose of fine-grained acoustic comparison
between different language environments. We further provide
detailed extraneous context for each vocal clip, as there are
other variables other than language environments that could
potentially influence dog’s sound, for example whether a dog
is eating or playing, outdoor or indoor(Larranaga et al. 2015;
Molnár et al. 2008). We make this fine distinction on the
context of the dog sounds so as to constrain confounding
factors  other  than  the  linguistic  environment  of  the  dogs.
Hereby, with the sound segmentation and context tagging,
each clean singular vocalization has a corresponding context.
Next, we present the full data processing pipeline (Figure
2) for constructing the EJShibaVoice dataset.
2.1    Sourcing Dog Vocalization Sounds Online
Since YouTube contains a large amount of user-uploaded
videos about their pet dogs, our first step is to source relevant
clips from two language environments via searching for the
keyword “Shiba Inu” and a scene category term on YouTube.
In this study, we use a total of eight scene categories, which
are defined in Table 1. These eight categories were proposed
in previous work about dog activity classification (Larranaga
et al. 2015). For example, to download videos about Shiba
Inu eating, we search for the query “Shiba Inu Eat -Coin” for
English and the correponding Japanese of this query for vo-
cals under Japanese host language environment. Here “-Coin”
is used as there are a large number of Shiba Inu Coin videos,
we add this term to filter out those irrelevant videos. All eight
scenes are searched under the same keyword patterns.
Because YouTube videos are not typically tagged with
original language or locale, we infer the language environ-
ment of a video by the languages ofits caption or title. For
example, if the title contains Japanese characters, we consider
(a)  source  videos  and  tag  lan-
guage.
(b)    sentence-level    segmenta-
tions.
(c) clean data after noise remov-
ing.
(d) word-level barks.
(e) context tagging.
Figure 2: The procedure of dataset construction.
it as a video recorded in an Japanese-speaking environment,
whereas a video with purely English title is considered to be
recorded in an English-speaking environment.
After all the videos are downloaded and tagged, 16,161
videos in total are collected. Among them we randomly sam-
ple 1,000 clips to verify the host language tagging accuracy
by watching the video clips. The accuracy is 93.2%, which
indicates that the majority of the Shiba Inu videos are tagged
with the correct host language environments, and fit our re-
search purpose.
2.2    Dog Vocalizations Extraction
The original audios downloaded from YouTube contain long
uninformative segments where dogs are silent or background
noises muffling the vocalizations. To ensure the quality of our
dataset, we have adopted a systematic and rigorous pipeline
of three steps to extract pure and singular vocal segments
from the audios.
Step 1: sentence-level segmentations extractionAs a pre-
liminary step, we extract long segments in which contains a
continuous series of dog vocalizations. Such long segments,
which we call a dog “sentence”, can be detected because they
are preceded or followed by significant periods of silence.
We apply PANNs (Kong et al. 2020), a pre-trained large
sound event detection model including as many as 527 sound
classes for recognizing the sound events. The continous seg-
ments detected by PANNs with the event class “barking” are
considered as the sentence-level bark segmentations.
Step 2: noise eliminationFrom our practical experience,
we have found that sometimes vocalizations will be unclear
due to the background music and human talking. Thus in
the second step, among those sentence-level segmentations,
those with co-existing event “speech” and “music” detected
by PANNs are removed from the dataset.
Step 3: word-level vocalizations extractionAnother chal-
lenge is that the coarse-grained sound clips may have some
short pauses in the middle. To remove these pauses, we fine-
tune a sound event detection model to determine the start and
end time of singular vocalizations, which we call “words” in
this paper.
PANNs is used as the pretrained model, which is trained
on AudioSet (Gemmeke et al. 2017) for all the sound classes
first. We then manually made framewise labels for the event
“barking” on 246 audio clips with a total length of 715 seconds
and fine-tuned this pretrained model. This fine-tuned model
can precisely detect dog vocals in the audio with the start time
and end time. Based on the precise start time and end time,
we use the fine-tuned model to remove the pause segments
between barkings.
At the end of these three steps, only a singular dog vocal-
ization is left in each clip. In total, 7,500 clips from 1,551 raw
videos remained. While we acknowledge the fact that the data
noise induced by recording devices and audio ambience is dif-
ficult to eliminate via web data, such factors/biases should be
well mitigated with the large and diverse data source coming
from either side of the Pacific that we curated on YouTube.
2.3    Context Metadata Tagging
We list the range of possible values forscene,locationand
activity, three components of the context in Table 1. The set
of values for locations values is a subset of the location set
from Inception-ResNet-V2 model.
ContextPossible values
SceneAlone, Bath, Eat, Fight, Play, Run, Stranger, Walk
Location76 possible locations, such as lawn, street, office, recre-
ation_room and so on
Activitya 768-dimentional real valued vector
Table 1: Description of the context metadata.
For locations and activites, we sample 10 images (equi-
spaced) from the video segment that coincides with the du-
ration  of  the  audio  bark  sample,  and  classify  the  images
into one of the location labels listed in Table 1. The loca-
tions are inferred from Inception-ResNet-V2 model(Szegedy
et al. 2017) trained on AI Challenge 2017 Scene Classifi-
cation dataset. We apply image caption and visual question
answering (VQA) models from OFA (Wang et al. 2022) to
first generate a caption for an image and then ask the model
“what is the dog doing in the image?”. The caption results are
transformed into word embeddings with pre-trained BERT
model(Devlin et al. 2019), and the 10 word embeddings of
the 10 images are averaged to obtain the overall activity em-
bedding of that bark sample. Besides, the timestamp of each
bark clip in the original video is provided. Some samples
from this dataset are shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: One audio sample in EJShibaVoice with its meta-
data of language environment, timestamps, and context.
2.4    Host Speech Extraction
To address the second research question, which is to find
the correlation between the barks and their host languages,
we  need  the  audio  speech  data  from  dogs’  hosts  as  well.
The  human  speech  in  the  original  audio  track  is  also  ex-
tracted by a strict pipeline. The first few steps are similar
to dog barking extraction: we start by getting those contin-
uous segments tagged as “speech” by PANNs and remove
those tagged as “music” from them to reduce the noises. As
it is normal for several people talking simultaneously, we
further apply a speaker diarization model Pyannote(Bredin
et al. 2020; Bredin and Laurent 2021) to separate them from
each other and retain speech of a single person in more fine-
grained segments.
2.5    The Final Product
The dataset consists of two parts: the barks and the corre-
sponding host speech. After the whole processing, 7,500
clean bark sounds and 15,197 corresponding host speech
clips finally remain in our EJShibaVoice dataset (Table 2).
# of ClipsAvg Len (s)Var of Len (s
2
)English Per(%)
Bark75000.610.28846.72
Speech151971.562.13444.01
Table 2: EJShibaVoice Statistics.
As the data statistics indicate, we include roughly equal
number of audio clips from English and Japanese environ-
ments, leading to a balanced dataset that can well support our
investigation on the influence of language environment.
The number of clips of each scene differs (Figure 4). As
we use the same method to process each scene, the possible
reason for imparity is that Shiba Inu barks diversely under
different conditions. For example, dogs tend to bark more to
show their strength when fighting, therefore the number of
clips under “fight” is the largest.
3    Methodology
To verify our assumptions that dogs from different human lan-
guage environments have different vocals and the difference
Figure 4: The percentage of bark clips for different scenes.
is related to their host’s language, we conduct classification-
based experiments and analyze the Shapley value to find
which features are important in distinguishing their vocals.
3.1    To Answer the First Question: Pairwise
Classification
To better control context and language environment, we adopt
a 4-way classification for pairwise comparison. Specifically,
we pair the dog vocalizations from the same context but under
different language environments in 4 ways: En-En, Ja-Ja, En-
Ja, and Ja-En. Two clips are considered to be from the same
context if they have the same scene category, the same loca-
tion, and their activity vectors with a cosine similarity of 0.95
or above. The problem is then defined as the classification of
these pairs into any of the above four classes. Our classifica-
tion models include xgboost, KNN, Logistic Regression, and
Random Forest. Multiple acoustic features including spectral
features (filterbank (Strang and Nguyen 1996), PLP (Her-
mansky 1990), MFCC (Davis and Mermelstein 1980)) and
handcrafted feature-sets (eGeMAPs, GeMAPs (Eyben et al.
2015), ComParE (Schuller et al. 2013)) are utilized to feed
into the model.
Dogs may also differ by their age and sex, but these at-
tributes are hard to obtain from the YouTube data even manu-
ally. Given the large size of our dataset, we believe a signifi-
cantly higher than random classification accuracy will show
that we can distinguish English dogs with Japanese dogs just
by acoustic features.
An alternative method is to group all fine-grained clips by
the contexts, and then do a two-way (English or Japanese
environment) classification in each group using only acoustic
features. However given the complex combination of scene,
location and activity, few samples from both languages share
exactly the same context hence we conducted the more diffi-
cult four-class experiment.
3.2    To Answer the Second Question: Correlation
on Prominent Factors
To ascertain the influence of the host language on dog vo-
calizations, we analyze prominent factors that distinguish
Japanese and English dogs’ sounds. Shapley value is com-
monly adopted to explain feature importance for a given
machine learning model, which can help determine the promi-
nent features influencing dog vocalizations.
To compare the relationships between a dog vocalization
and the host language, we also include features extracted from
human speech (English and Japanese corpus). The speech
sources include 8,000 clips from CommonVoice (Ardila et al.
2019), which is an open source multilingual speech dataset
contributed by volunteers around the world, and host speech
from EJShibaVoice. We adopt two different sets of speech
data because they provide distinctive features. Speech from
EJShibaVoice has direct relation with vocalizations, so that
we can conduct Pearson value analysis between them, while
CommonVoice is purer and more common to help us find
universal feature of human speech. Similar procedures are
conducted on human language and the prominent factors
are later compared with those inferred from dog vocaliza-
tions (Section 4.2). Furthermore, to ascertain the correlation
between vocalizations and their host speech in a statistical
way, we analyze the Pearson correlation between them. In
the meantime, the Pearson correlation between vocalizations
and random speech is shown to compare (Section 4.2).
4    Results and Analysis
In  this  section,  we  present  the  classification  results  from
different machine learning models with different features
extracted from our dataset EJShibaVoice. We further compare
Shapley values on the GeMAPs feature to find the prominent
factors. We also try several different classification models on
both spectral and handcrafted acoustic features.
4.1    Results of Pairwise Classification
xgboostKNNLRRF
filterbank0.98270.90570.63740.9603
PLP
0.97330.77010.43750.9123
MFCC0.98280.91610.54410.9587
ComParE0.98680.57170.60040.9520
GeMAPs0.98360.73170.62300.9474
eGeMAPs0.98400.74320.69010.9567
Table 3: 4-class classification accuracy on the vocal pairs.
In total, we form 9,200 pairs of vocal clips. Among these,
we formed 4 different pairs, EN-EN, JA-JA, EN-JA, and
JA-EN, with 2,300 clips in each set respectively. And we
perform 5-fold cross-validation on this paired dataset. The
overall classification results are presented in Table 3, where
six commonly-adopted audio features are compared using
four different classification models. Among these features,
filterbank, PLP, and MFCC are extracted from the spectral
transformation and have 24, 13, and 13 dimensions respec-
tively. By contrast, ComParE, GeMAPs, and eGeMAPs are
human-crafted features and have 6373, 62, and 88 dimen-
sions respectively. These features are easier to explain from
perception perspectives, however, they might be less informa-
tive than direct spectral features, resulting in relatively lower
accuracy in some models.
Our first observation is that no matter which feature set
or which model is used, dog vocals from different host lan-
guage environments can be clearly distinguished, because
the accuracies are all clearly higher than 0.25 (the random
guess). In other words, this indicates that there is a certain
acoustic difference between the dog vocals in these two lan-
guage environments. Specifically, the accuracy of ComParE
significantly drops while using KNN, which is due to the
curse of dimensionality of this 6,373 dimension feature. XG-
Boost shows the highest classification accuracy, with all six
features demonstrating an accuracy higher than 0.90. This
result affirms thatdog vocals under English environments
are distinctly different from those under Japanese envi-
ronments.
Next, we will find out what are the crucial features that
distinguish the English dogs from the Japanese dogs.
4.2    Results of Correlation on Prominent Factors
Prominent Analysis on GeMAPsThe results of SHAP
values can be seen in Figure 5 and details of the selected
dimensions are listed in Table 4.
Figure  5:  The  average  SHAP  values  (absolute  value)  of
GeMAPs  sorting  from  high  to  low.  Features  with  SHAP
values higher than 0.04 are considered prominent because of
the sudden drop in SHAP values to the right those features.
DimensionDim TypeSHAP
loudness_sma3_ameanEnergy0.1336
F0semitoneFrom27.5Hz_sma3nz_percentile50.0Frequency0.0622
loudness_sma3_meanRisingSlopeEnergy0.0590
logRelF0-H1-A3_sma3nz_stddevNormFrequency0.0561
loudnessPeaksPerSecTemporal0.0507
F0semitoneFrom27.5Hz_sma3nz_percentile80.0Frequency0.0498
hammarbergIndexV_sma3nz_stddevNorm
Spectral0.0491
slopeV0-500_sma3nz_ameanTemporal0.0490
loudness_sma3_percentile80.0Energy0.0470
slopeV500-1500_sma3nz_stddevNorm
Temporal0.0467
Table 4: Details of Prominent Dimensions in GeMAPs.
The ten prominent factors in Table 4 fall into four cate-
gories:spectral,temporal,energy, andfrequency, accord-
ing to the original GeMAPS definition. Most of the promi-
nent factors are spectral parameters, including dimensions of
HammerbergIndex and slope. HammerbergIndex represents
the ratio of the strongest peak in the 0-2kHz region to the
strongest peak in the 2-5kHz region, while Slope represents
the linear regression slope of the spectral power spectrum
within the given band. F0semitone-related factors describe
the pitch, which is highly related to the fundamental fre-
quency. The factors about segment length are temporal param-
eters. The energy-related parameter loudness, which repre-
sents the sound intensity, is largely affected by the recording
device and environment.
Considering these factors, the results show that dog vo-
cals from two host language environments have distinctive
differences in their energy distribution over frequency. In
quantitative analysis, vocals from the Japanese language en-
vironment have a higher frequency than those from English.
In order to better compare the vocals with human language,
we conduct a SHAP analysis on human speech datasets: open
public language corpus CommonVoice and the host speech
extracted from the same videos as the dog vocals. To find out
the difference between these two languages, we use xgboost
as well to classify human speech into English or Japanese
and then compute Shapley values, with results presented in
Figure 6.
Figure 6: (a) and (b) are the results of SHAP analysis ranked
by descending SHAP values on open corpus and extracted
human speech audios, respectively. The top six dimensions
are shown on the right, and those that overlap with prominent
factors in vocals of dogs are bolded.
In the human speech analysis, the difference between En-
glish and Japanese concentrates on the slope, loudness, and
F0semitone. From the above, we can conclude that the dif-
ference between vocals coming from different host language
environments is mainly related to frequency. In the meantime,
from our analysis of prominent acoustic factors, the vocalsvo-
cals of dogs and voices of humans share several common
prominent factors, suggesting that the host human language
have a correlation with the vocals of dogs.
Furthermore, to ascertain the correlation between vocals
and speech more directly besides the overlap of their promi-
nent factors, we calculate the Pearson’s correlation between
the two from the same videos in the ten prominent dimensions
selected (Table 5).
Language Speed ComparisonDog vocals under English
and Japanese host language environments differ not only in
these acoustic dimensions above, but a more intuitive dimen-
sion:speed.
A formal measure of the speed of speech is the number
of syllables in a given time duration. For speech from the
same video as the dog voices, we apply an automatic speech
recognition (ASR) model in Whisper (Radford et al. 2022),
one of the state-of-the-art ASR models which smoothly tran-
scribes the extracted speech into either English or Japanese
texts. At the same time, CommonVoice already provides cor-
responding texts for their audio. The segmentation of text into
sequences of syllables is done by some subfunction ofeS-
peak(Duddington and Dunn 2012), which is a compact open
source software speech synthesizer for English and other
languages. However, as there is no concept of “syllable” nor
alphabet for Shiba Inu barks, we adopt another similar way
for syllablizing dog clips. The dog clips are divided into se-
quences of syllable-like units according to an oscillator-based
algorithm (Räsänen, Doyle, and Frank 2018).
Figure 7: The speed comparison for barks, host speech from
same video and speech from CommonVoice.
The number of syllables or syllable-like units per second
is shown in Figure 7. We make the following discoveries:
First, dog vocals from Japanese environment and Japanese
human speech clips are generally faster than dog vocals from
English environment and English speech clips. This suggests
that when it comes to speed, there is a correlation between
dog vocals and human speech. Second, it appears that human
speech in EJShibaVoice dataset is faster than that of Com-
monVoice. The difference in speed can be attributed to the
recording style of CommonVoice, which tends to be slower
than typical speech.
Here we illustrate the spectrograms of two typical dog
vocal samples from the two language environments in Figure
8. It is clear that in the same time length, the vocal under
Japanese language environment has more syllable-like units
than that under English language environment while the fre-
quency of those vocals in the English environment is closer
to the low-frequency region.
Dimension
With Host SpeechWith Random Speech
Pearson Coefficientp-valuePearson Coefficientp-value
loudness_sma3_amean0.5372.73e-830.0250.405
F0semitoneFrom27.5Hz_sma3nz_percentile50.00.1054.76e-4-0.0120.691
loudness_sma3_meanRisingSlope0.1591.08e-70.0430.155
logRelF0-H1-A3_sma3nz_stddevNorm0.0020.9414.25e-40.989
loudnessPeaksPerSec0.1243.75e-51.20e-30.968
F0semitoneFrom27.5Hz_sma3nz_percentile80.0
0.1626.40e-8-0.0110.714
hammarbergIndexV_sma3nz_stddevNorm9.13e-30.7626.47e-30.830
slopeV0-500_sma3nz_amean0.5807.37e-1000.0290.334
loudness_sma3_percentile80.00.4363.03e-520.0300.322
slopeV500-1500_sma3nz_stddevNorm
0.0170.573-4.40e-30.884
Table 5: The correlation analysis is on two groups of data. In the first group, the analysis is on the correlation between dog vocals
and their host speech, in the second group the correlation is between dog vocals and random speech. The dimensions of high
correlation with p-value lower than 0.05 are bold.
(a) A Bark under Japanese Env.(b) A Bark under English Env.
Figure 8: The spectrogram of two audio samples which are
from different language environmentsand similar situations.
4.3    Summary of Findings
Through all the above analysis, we can find thatthe key
accoustic features that distinguish Shiba Inus from two
language environments are frequency and speed, which
correlate well with human speech.
Our findings corroborate with previous literature (Coupé
et al. 2019; Graham 2014) that the syllable speed of Japanese
surpasses that of English and many other languages. At the
same time, the frequency of Japanese is relatively higher than
that of English. All these findings show that the vocals under
English and Japanese language environments are different
and in two dimensions of frequency and speed. To explain in
detail, English dog vocals at a lower frequency than Japanese
dogs, but Japanese dog vocals faster than English dogs. The
same phenomenon can be observed with human speakers of
these two languages.
4.4    Human Evaluation on Acoustic Features
Alongside acoustic analysis, we assess cross-linguistic dog
vocals via surveys. We pick 20 vocal pairs with distinct lan-
guage settings from Section 3. Each of the 20 questionnaires,
given to 30 participants, makes 600 in total. Pair sequence is
randomized. When spotting differences, participants gauge
from four dimensions below: (1)urgency, which represents
the speed (2)pitch (3)duty ratio, which is the ratio of the dura-
tion of the voiced segments to that of the unvoiced segments
(4)loudness.
Among four above dimensions, 74.01%, 79.09%, 67.23%
and 63.56% of the questionnaires which says that there are
differences between the two clips report dimension differ-
ence respectively. This shows that from a human perspective
the differences are most revealed by pitch, which is highly
frequency related. This is in line with our acoustic analysis.
4.5    Restrictions
Compared to previous studies, we adopt a first-of-its-kind
method of collecting data from the Internet. Some may argue
that former studies have a more controllable environment to
eliminate confounding factors. However, it is very unlikely to
cultivate exactly the same growing environment as subjectiv-
ity always exists. On the contrary, with the large amount of
data from various families, we can remedy the confounding
factors in a statistical way. Our pipeline is hence beneficial
as we can scale up the data in the future and further validate
our argument.
5    Conclusion
In this paper, we define a new problem of discovering the
linguistic influence of the host on the sounds of their pet dogs.
Experiments have shown that there is a significant difference
in audio frequency and speed between the voice of dogs in the
Japanese language environment and the English environment.
Specifically, English dogs bark at a lower pitch than Japanese
dogs, while Japanese dogs bark faster than English ones. The
phenomena can be observed in humans as well.
We sourced our data from YouTube, which, though noisy,
ensures the quantity and variety and has rarely been covered
in previous studies. The fact that we removed quite a lot of
data from the raw videos is due to the rigorous pipeline we
developed for quality purposes. Eventually, our EJShibaVoice
dataset, which contains a large number of Shiba Inu sound
clips  and  their  corresponding  host  speech  under  various
scenes will facilitate future research in this field.
Future direction can be a larger dataset for a more gen-
eral investigation, i.e. more breeds and more sound clips, as
well as more various language environments in addition to
Japanese and English in this study. Note that the pipeline we
proposed is language-agnostic and hence can be applied to
other studies with similar purposes.
References
Ardila, R.; Branson, M.; Davis, K.; Henretty, M.; Kohler, M.;
Meyer, J.; Morais, R.; Saunders, L.; Tyers, F. M.; and Weber,
G. 2019. Common Voice: A Massively-Multilingual Speech
Corpus.CoRR, abs/1912.06670.
Bredin, H.; and Laurent, A. 2021.  End-to-end speaker seg-
mentation for overlap-aware resegmentation. InProc. Inter-
speech 2021.
Bredin,  H.;  Yin,  R.;  Coria,  J.  M.;  Gelly,  G.;  Korshunov,
P.; Lavechin, M.; Fustes, D.; Titeux, H.; Bouaziz, W.; and
Gill, M.-P. 2020. pyannote.audio: neural building blocks for
speaker diarization.  InICASSP 2020, IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing.
Coupé, C.; Oh, Y. M.; Dediu, D.; and Pellegrino, F. 2019.
Different languages, similar encoding efficiency: Comparable
information rates across the human communicative niche.
Science Advances, 5(9): eaaw2594.
Davis, S.; and Mermelstein, P. 1980.  Comparison of para-
metric representations for monosyllabic word recognition
in continuously spoken sentences.IEEE transactions on
acoustics, speech, and signal processing, 28(4): 357–366.
Devlin,  J.;  Chang,  M.;  Lee,  K.;  and  Toutanova,  K.  2019.
BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding.   In Burstein, J.; Doran, C.; and
Solorio, T., eds.,Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-
HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers), 4171–4186. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Duddington, J.; and Dunn, R. 2012.  eSpeak text to speech.
Web publication: http://espeak. sourceforge. net.
Ehsani, K.; Bagherinezhad, H.; Redmon, J.; Mottaghi, R.;
and  Farhadi,  A.  2018.   Who  let  the  dogs  out?  modeling
dog behavior from visual data. InProceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
4051–4060.
Eyben,  F.;  Scherer,  K.  R.;  Schuller,  B.  W.;  Sundberg,  J.;
André, E.; Busso, C.; Devillers, L. Y.; Epps, J.; Laukka, P.;
Narayanan, S. S.; et al. 2015. The Geneva minimalistic acous-
tic parameter set (GeMAPS) for voice research and affective
computing.IEEE transactions on affective computing, 7(2):
190–202.
Gemmeke,  J.  F.;  Ellis,  D.  P.;  Freedman,  D.;  Jansen,  A.;
Lawrence, W.; Moore, R. C.; Plakal, M.; and Ritter, M. 2017.
Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for audio
events. In2017 IEEE international conference on acoustics,
speech and signal processing (ICASSP), 776–780. IEEE.
Graham, C. 2014. Fundamental frequency range in Japanese
and English: The case of simultaneous bilinguals.Phonetica,
71(4): 271–295.
Hantke, S.; Cummins, N.; and Schuller, B. 2018.  What is
my dog trying to tell me? The automatic recognition of the
context and perceived emotion of dog barks. In2018 IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing (ICASSP), 5134–5138. IEEE.
Hermansky,  H.  1990.   Perceptual  linear  predictive  (PLP)
analysis of speech.the Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 87(4): 1738–1752.
Ide, Y.; Araki, T.; Hamada, R.; Ohno, K.; and Yanai, K. 2021.
Rescue  dog  action  recognition  by  integrating  ego-centric
video, sound and sensor information.  InPattern Recogni-
tion. ICPR International Workshops and Challenges: Virtual
Event, January 10–15, 2021, Proceedings, Part III, 321–333.
Springer.
Jégh-Czinege,  N.;  Faragó,  T.;  and  Pongrácz,  P.  2020.   A
bark of its own kind – the acoustics of ‘annoying’ dog barks
suggests a specific attention-evoking effect for humans.Bioa-
coustics, 29(2): 210–225.
Kong, Q.; Cao, Y.; Iqbal, T.; Wang, Y.; Wang, W.; and Plumb-
ley, M. D. 2020. Panns: Large-scale pretrained audio neural
networks for audio pattern recognition.IEEE/ACM Trans-
actions  on Audio, Speech, and  Language  Processing,  28:
2880–2894.
Larranaga, A.; Bielza, C.; Pongrácz, P.; Faragó, T.; Bálint,
A.; and Larranaga, P. 2015. Comparing supervised learning
methods for classifying sex, age, context and individual Mudi
dogs from barking.Animal cognition, 18(2): 405–421.
Molnár,  C.;  Kaplan,  F.;  Roy,  P.;  Pachet,  F.;  Pongrácz,  P.;
Dóka, A.; and Miklósi, Á. 2008. Classification of dog barks:
a machine learning approach.Animal Cognition, 11(3): 389–
400.
Paladini, A. 2020.  The bark and its meanings in inter and
intra-specific language.Dog behavior, 6(1): 21–30.
Pongrácz, P. 2017.   Modeling evolutionary changes in in-
formation transfer: Effects of domestication on the vocal
communication of dogs (Canis familiaris).European Psy-
chologist, 22(4): 219.
Pongrácz, P.; Molnár, C.; Dóka, A.; and Miklósi, Á. 2011.
Do children understand man’s best friend? Classification of
dog barks by pre-adolescents and adults.Applied animal
behaviour science, 135(1-2): 95–102.
Pongrácz, P.; Molnár, C.; and Miklósi, Á. 2010. Barking in
family dogs: an ethological approach.The Veterinary Journal,
183(2): 141–147.
Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Xu, T.; Brockman, G.; McLeavey,
C.;  and  Sutskever,  I.  2022.Robust  speech  recogni-
tion  via  large-scale  weak  supervision.arXiv  preprint
arXiv:2212.04356.
Räsänen, O.; Doyle, G.; and Frank, M. C. 2018. Pre-linguistic
segmentation of speech into syllable-like units.Cognition,
171: 130–150.
Schuller, B.; Steidl, S.; Batliner, A.; Vinciarelli, A.; Scherer,
K.; Ringeval, F.; Chetouani, M.; Weninger, F.; Eyben, F.;
Marchi, E.; et al. 2013.   The INTERSPEECH 2013 com-
putational paralinguistics challenge: Social signals, conflict,
emotion, autism. InProceedings INTERSPEECH 2013, 14th
Annual Conference of the International Speech Communica-
tion Association, Lyon, France.
Siniscalchi, M.; d’Ingeo, S.; Minunno, M.; and Quaranta, A.
2018. Communication in dogs.Animals, 8(8): 131.
Strang, G.; and Nguyen, T. 1996.Wavelets and filter banks.
SIAM.
Szegedy, C.; Ioffe, S.; Vanhoucke, V.; and Alemi, A. A. 2017.
Inception-v4,  inception-resnet  and  the  impact  of  residual
connections on learning. InThirty-first AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence.
Thorndike, L.; and Bruce, D. 2017.Animal intelligence:
Experimental studies. Routledge.
Wang, P.; Yang, A.; Men, R.; Lin, J.; Bai, S.; Li, Z.; Ma,
J.; Zhou, C.; Zhou, J.; and Yang, H. 2022.   OFA: Unify-
ing Architectures, Tasks, and Modalities Through a Simple
Sequence-to-Sequence Learning Framework.  162: 23318–
23340.