Feel the Bite: Robot-Assisted Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer using
Robust Mouth Perception and Physical Interaction-Aware Control
Rajat Kumar Jenamani
Cornell University
rj277@cornell.edu
Daniel Stabile
Cornell University
Ziang Liu
Cornell University
Abrar Anwar
University of Southern California
Katherine Dimitropoulou
Columbia University
Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee
Cornell University
Figure 1: We propose an inside-mouth bite transfer system that uses two key components, (i) robust multi-view mouth
perception, and (ii) physical interaction-aware control, to successfully feed care recipients with diverse mobility limitations.
Abstract
Robot-assisted feeding can greatly enhance the lives of those with
mobility limitations. Modern feeding systems can pick up and posi-
tion food in front of a care recipient’s mouth for a bite. However,
many with severe mobility constraints cannot lean forward and
need direct inside-mouth food placement. This demands precision,
especially for those with restricted mouth openings, and appropri-
ately reacting to various physical interactions — incidental contacts
as the utensil moves inside, impulsive contacts due to sudden mus-
cle spasms, deliberate tongue maneuvers by the person being fed to
guide the utensil, and intentional bites. In this paper, we propose an
inside-mouth bite transfer system that addresses these challenges
with two key components: a multi-view mouth perception pipeline
robust to tool occlusion, and a control mechanism that employs mul-
timodal time-series classification to discern and react to different
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USA
©2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0322-5/24/03. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610977.3634975
physical interactions. We demonstrate the efficacy of these individ-
ual components through two ablation studies. In a full system eval-
uation, our system successfully fed 13 care recipients with diverse
mobility challenges. Participants consistently emphasized the com-
fort and safety of our inside-mouth bite transfer system, and gave
it high technology acceptance ratings — underscoring its transfor-
mative potential in real-world scenarios. Supplementary materials
and videos can be found at:emprise.cs.cornell.edu/bitetransfer.
CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing→Accessibility technologies;
•Computer systems organization→Robotics.
Keywords
Assistive Robots, Physical Human-Robot Interaction, Robot-Assisted
Feeding
ACM Reference Format:
Rajat Kumar Jenamani, Daniel Stabile, Ziang Liu, Abrar Anwar, Katherine
Dimitropoulou, and Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee. 2024. Feel the Bite: Robot-
Assisted Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer using Robust Mouth Perception and
Physical Interaction-Aware Control. InProceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI ’24), March 11–
14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USA.ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3610977.3634975
arXiv:2403.04067v1  [cs.RO]  6 Mar 2024
HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USARajat Kumar Jenamani et al.
1  INTRODUCTION
Eating is an Activity of Daily Living (ADL) [32]. Losing the ability
to independently feed oneself can be devastating, and may elicit
feelings of shame and dependence among care recipients [31,41,44].
In the United States alone, approximately one million adults with
mobility limitations need assistance with eating [46]. Feeding is also
one of the most time-consuming ADLs for caregivers [13], placing a
significant burden on them [19,39]. Robot-assisted feeding systems
have the potential to enhance the quality of life of care recipients
[10] and reduce caregiver burden.
Robot-assisted feeding can be broken down into two stages:
bite acquisition and bite transfer [40]. Bite acquisition involves
acquiring a bite-sized food item with an appropriate utensil [21,26–
28], whereas bite transfer entails moving it from above the plate to
the care recipient’s mouth [7,24,43]. In this paper, we focus on bite
transfer. Most prior works bring a food item in front of the mouth
of a care recipient, who is then expected to lean forward to take the
bite. However, for those with severe upper body and neck mobility
limitations, leaning forward for an outside-mouth bite transfer can
be functionally impossible, necessitating the direct placement of
food in their mouths. Even for care recipients who can lean forward,
having to repeatedly make this movement can be exhausting. In this
work, we present a robot-assisted feeding system that can perform
inside-mouth bite transfer and demonstrate its utility for assisting
a diverse group of care recipients with severe mobility limitations.
Care recipients who need inside-mouth bite transfers often have
complex medical conditions – including limited mouth opening
[29], involuntary movements (spasms), and requirement of food
transfer at a specific location inside their mouth – which makes
feeding them extremely challenging. Involuntary motions, diverse
in their type and occurrence, demand alert and adaptable feeding
strategies. For example, if an involuntary forward spasm occurs just
as the utensil approaches the care recipient’s mouth, the caregiver
must quickly retract the utensil to avoid harm. If such a motion
happens with the utensil already inside the mouth, the caregiver
should comply with the motion, ensuring the utensil moves in
harmony with it to avoid injury. Another layer of intricacy emerges
when food must be placed precisely within the mouth at a preferred
transfer location. In these instances, care recipients may use their
tongue to guide the utensil, necessitating that caregivers recognize
and act upon this cue. In addition to this, physical interactions
also occur when slight errors in sensing/control lead to incidental
contacts, and when care recipients intentionally bite down on the
food. Consequently, feeding individuals with such complex needs
requires precision in perception and control, and identifying and
appropriately reacting to various types of physical interactions.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:
Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer System.We propose a system
that leverages two key components – robust multi-view mouth
perception, and physical interaction-aware control – to address the
aforementioned challenges and successfully feed care recipients
with severe mobility limitations food inside their mouth.
Robust Multi-View Mouth Perception Method.Existing
methods for mouth perception in robot-assisted feeding rely on a
single in-hand camera view, and thus face challenges during inside-
mouth bite transfer due to significant occlusion from the feeding
utensil. To address this, we introduce a novel multi-view mouth-
perception approach that is robust to tool occlusion (Section 3.1).
This method allows for uninterrupted real-time mouth perception
throughout the transfer process, enabling detection and adaptation
to both voluntary and involuntary head movements.
Physical Interaction-Aware Control Method.We propose
an interaction-aware controller that uses multimodal sensing for
classifying the nature of physical interactions in real-time and re-
acts accordingly (Section 3.2). Adopting a data-driven approach, we
collect a multimodal dataset comprising various types of physical
interactions that can occur and train time-series classification mod-
els. Based on the detected interaction type, we switch between a
goal-tracking controller and a force-tracking controller.
Evaluation of System Components.We demonstrate the ne-
cessity of both novel components through evaluations with base-
lines and two ablation studies involving participants without mo-
bility limitations (Section 4).
Full System Evaluation with Care Recipients.We demon-
strate our system’s efficacy through a user study with 13 care recip-
ients with diverse medical conditions, all necessitating assistance
in feeding. Findings suggest users perceive our system as safe and
comfortable, and view the technology favorably as measured using
a Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) survey [18].
2  RELATED WORK
Robot-Assisted Feeding.While many commercial feeding
systems [3,4] exist, their limited autonomy and need for manual
trajectory programming for bite transfer hinder widespread adop-
tion and retention. Over recent years, various robot-assisted feeding
systems with autonomous transfer capabilities have been proposed
[7,11,24]. However, they assume that care recipients can lean for-
ward, causing the robot to stop at a predetermined distance from
their mouth. More recently, a few systems have explored inside-
mouth bite transfer [42,43], but they perceive the user’s mouth
pose only once (initially) and do not continuously track it during
transfer. This requires users to remain static throughout the entire
transfer process, a challenging demand for many individuals with
pronounced mobility impairments. These systems also do not con-
sider various types of physical interactions that can arise during
inside-mouth bite transfer, such as incidental contacts, impulsive
contacts, and in-mouth manipulation. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first to demonstrate autonomous inside-mouth bite
transfer for care recipients having complex medical conditions such
as limited mouth opening, involuntary movements, and precise food
placement requirements for feeding.
Mouth Perception.To effectively feed care recipients with
complex medical conditions, it is necessary to accurately perceive
their mouth for the whole duration of inside-mouth bite transfer.
Contemporary robot-assisted feeding systems use single in-hand
cameras, and localize the mouth by either projecting 2D mouth
landmarks onto an aligned depth image [43], or fitting a fixed-head
model to sparse 3D facial landmarks [24]. However, near the mouth,
significant occlusion from the utensil leads to noisy depth data and
inaccuracies in single-view perception of 2D landmarks, rendering
these methods ineffective for continuous mouth tracking. In this
work, we propose a mouth perception pipeline that leverages mul-
tiple in-hand cameras and parameterized head models to be robust
Feel the Bite: Robot-Assisted Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer using Robust Mouth Perception and Physical Interaction-Aware Control HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USA
Figure 2: The self-supervised multi-view training of FEMTO (left) enables robust mouth perception under tool occlusion (center).
Our perception pipeline (right) leverages FEMTO to accurately estimate mouth pose despite noisy depth due to occlusion.
to tool occlusion, thus enabling uninterrupted and accurate mouth
perception. Among parameterized head models [9,17,36], Faces
Learned with an Articulated Model and Expressions (FLAME) [36] is
of special interest as it separates the representation of identity, pose,
and facial expression. Detailed Expression Capture and Animation
(DECA) [22], is state-of-the-art for FLAME parameter estimation,
and takes a single RGB image as input. However, this reliance on
monocular RGB images makes DECA vulnerable to inaccuracies
in our use case where significant occlusions around the mouth are
present. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel encoder
based on DECA’s architecture that integrates data from multiple
cameras, ensuring robust prediction of FLAME parameters.
Physical Interaction-Aware Control.Prior work in contact
classification distinguishes between incidental collisions and inten-
tional task contacts during collaborative human-robot manipulation
[15,23,25,33,38]. Classical approaches [33] use the spectral norm
of external force/torque signals in a specific frequency range for
classification. In contrast, several other methods leverage learning-
based approaches like Support Vector Machines with time-series
features derived from physical contact models [15,23,25], or time-
series models such as RNNs [38]. While these methods typically
use haptic data, we are inspired by works that integrate multiple
sensing modalities [20,35,37,45]. To the best of our knowledge,
our work is the first to explore multimodal (visual + haptic) sens-
ing for physical human-robot interaction classification. It is also
the first to categorize physical interaction types beyond incidental
and intentional, by additionally identifying impulsive interactions
and further distinguishing intentional interactions into in-mouth
manipulation and bite interactions.
3  Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer System
Our inside-mouth bite transfer system (Figure 1) consists of a Ki-
nova Gen3 6 DoF robotic arm [2] with a Robotiq 2F-85 gripper [5]
grasping a custom-built feeding tool. It uses two Intel RealSense
D415 RGBD cameras mounted on the robot’s wrist, one above and
one below the utensil, for visual input, and a 6-axis ATI Nano25
F/T sensor [1] for haptic feedback. Our system leverages two key
novel components - robust multi-view mouth perception (Section
3.1) and physical interaction-aware control (Section 3.2).
3.1  Robust Multi-View Mouth Perception
We require accurate mouth perception for the entire duration of
inside-mouth bite transfer to successfully feed care recipients hav-
ing small mouth openings, involuntary motions, and requirements
of food placements at specific locations inside their mouth. How-
ever, real-time mouth perception using a single in-hand camera is
challenging as there is significant occlusion from the utensil due
to which: (i) state-of-the-art monocular methods such as DECA
[22] fail at mouth keypoint detection, and (ii) even if we obtain
the mouth keypoints, projecting them on the depth image for pose
estimation in the real-world fails as the depth image is noisy in
the vicinity of the utensil. We propose a mouth perception pipeline
that is robust to this occlusion challenge. Central to this pipeline is
a novel method - Face Estimation from Multiple Views under Tool
Occlusion (FEMTO). FEMTO uses inputs from two in-hand cameras
mounted diametrically opposite to reconstruct a personalized head
model for the care recipient, and estimates dense 2D facial key-
points. For the personalized head model, we use the parameterized
head model FLAME [36] which is represented by a small number
of shape, pose, and expression parameters.
Model Architecture.FEMTO’s architecture consists of two
parallel encoders; one encoder for the top image and the other for
the bottom. These encoders use frozen weights from DECA [22],
a single-view model pre-trained on 2 million images from large
datasets [12,14,47]. The outputs of these encoders are concatenated
and further processed through two fully-connected layers. These
layers integrate information from both cameras, and, similar to
DECA, generate FLAME parameters and an orthographic camera
pose for projecting the 3D FLAME mesh into image space.
Self-Supervised Finetuning on Self-Curated Dataset.To
make FEMTO robust to occlusions, we finetune it on a self-curated
visual dataset. We collect about 5000 unoccluded multi-view images
with different head poses and facial expressions from 10 participants.
Data from 8 participants are used for training FEMTO, and data
from the remaining 2 participants are used for comparison against
baselines. The latter is detailed in Section 4.1. These images are
captured without the utensil in place, and thus DECA can typically
generate accurate FLAME parameters and camera pose for these
HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USARajat Kumar Jenamani et al.
images. We then synthetically occlude these images by in-painting
the utensil (Figure 2). We use various utensils holding distinct food
items at this step to ensure that FEMTO can generalize to new uten-
sils and food items. We provide these occluded images to FEMTO,
and use annotations generated by DECA for the corresponding
un-occluded image as ground truth for supervision. We evaluate all
the generated ground truth parameters and manually update them
wherever necessary. FLAME’s modular parameterization allows for
focusing training on parameters where DECA especially struggles
under utensil occlusion, notably jaw pose prediction which is vital
for detecting whether the mouth is open or closed.
Robust Mouth Perception Pipeline.FEMTO processes the
top and bottom images to generate FLAME parameters and the
orthographic camera pose of the top RGB image relative to the
head model (Figure 2). These FLAME parameters decode into a
custom 3D head model, and the generated camera pose can be used
to project this model to the top RGB image and obtain dense 2D
facial keypoints. We combine these 2D keypoints with the aligned
depth image from the top camera to get dense 3D world keypoints.
Finally, we use a correspondence-based registration robust to out-
liers to pose the generated head model to the 3D world keypoints.
Despite the depth data around the mouth region being noisy due to
occlusion from the utensil, the customized head model enables us
to use depth data from other regions of the head for accurate mouth
pose estimation. This proposed pipeline runs real-time (5-10Hz) on
a system with RTX 3090.
Details on data collection, model training, and correspondence-
based registration method used are in the Appendix [6].
3.2  Physical Interaction-Aware Control
Our physical interaction-aware control method first classifies the
subtle physical interactions during bite transfer and switches ap-
propriate compliant controllers accordingly. We take a data-driven
approach to identify the nature of physical-interaction, and collect
visual and haptic data for four types of physical interactions:
(1)
Incidental interactions (collisions) between the utensil and
user’s  mouth  that  occur  outside  the  mouth  due  to  sens-
ing/control errors as the robot attempts to move inside.
(2)In-mouth manipulation interactions initiated by the user
using their tongue to guide the utensil to a desired transfer
location inside their mouth.
(3)
Impulsive interactions due to involuntary spasms occurring
while the utensil is inside the mouth.
(4)  Bite interactions that occur when the user takes a bite.
Data Collection.We collect a total of 3072 physical interactions
(512 interactions X 6 participants without mobility limitations),
varying both the utensil and the robot controller. For each physical
interaction, we ask participants to perform different variations of
the interaction. For example, when taking bites, participants are
instructed to use only their teeth around the food item, only their
lips around the utensil, or both.
Multimodal Classification.For each physical interaction, we
analyze visual and haptic data from a 100ms window starting at
contact initiation. Visual features include 2D and 3D face keypoints
generated from our mouth perception pipeline (Section 3.1). In line
with related haptic classification work [23,25], we augment raw
haptic data with time-series features computed over the window,
such as mean, range, kurtosis, Hjorth complexity, and frequency
domain. We evaluate four models: Support Vector Machines (SVM)
[16], Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) [30], Temporal Convolutional
Networks (TCN) [34], and Time-Series Transformers (TST) [48].
Controller Switching.Once the robot recognizes the nature of
physical interaction, it switches to an appropriate controller using
an event-driven control method. We use two compliant controllers
during inside-mouth bite transfer: a goal-tracking controller and
a force-tracking controller. The goal-tracking controller tracks a
given goal pose and is ideal for moving the food item to a desired
position inside the user’s mouth and moving the utensil outside
their mouth as soon as a bite is detected. The force-tracking con-
troller minimizes contact force on the F/T sensor at the end-effector
and thus is very compliant and reactive. This is ideal for physical
interactions such as impulsive and in-mouth manipulation, where
the robot must quickly respond to forces applied to the utensil.
Details on data collection, model training, and controller imple-
mentation are provided in the Appendix [6].
4  Evaluation of System Components
4.1  Mouth Perception Evaluation
We compare the performance of proposed mouth perception method
against baselines for accurate 3D mouth keypoint generation, and
perform an ablation study to evaluate the necessity of a key fea-
ture our mouth perception pipeline enables: continuous, real-time
mouth perception for inside-mouth bite transfer.
Eval. 1: Comparison with Baselines -We compare the root
mean square error (RMSE) of 3D mouth keypoints generated by
our novel mouth perception method (FEMTO) against a pre-trained
DECA using our proposed pipeline, and contemporary mouth per-
ception methods in robot-assisted feeding [24,43] (Table 1). For
this evaluation, we use data from the 2 test participants in Section
3.1, introducing synthetic utensil occlusion to color and depth im-
ages. Ground truth keypoints are generated by applying our mouth
perception pipeline with DECA to the unoccluded originals.
Table 1: FEMTO outperforms baselines adapted from robot-
assisted feeding [24,43] and head perception [22] literature.
MethodRMSE (in푚푚)
Gallenberger et al. 2019 [24]110.454
Shaikewitz et al. 2023 [43]82.946
DECA [22]4.72
FEMTO (Ours)3.69
3.69
3.69
Eval. 2: Necessity of Real-Time Mouth Perception -We per-
form an ablation study to evaluate the necessity of continuous,
real-time mouth perception for the whole duration of inside-mouth
bite transfer. This study examines three scenarios, selected based
on feedback from individuals with mobility limitations, that impact
their feeding process: (1) voluntary head movement, (2) voluntary
speaking, and (3) involuntary head movement (spasm).
Methods.In each scenario, we compare two methods: our ap-
proach (RealTime), which employs continuous, real-time mouth
perception, and the baseline (OneTime) [43] which estimates the
user’s mouth pose only once when they first open their mouth.
Procedure.We conducted the study with 15 participants (11
male, 4 female; ages 20-65) who had no mobility limitations. After
participants provide their demographics and complete pre-study
Feel the Bite: Robot-Assisted Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer using Robust Mouth Perception and Physical Interaction-Aware Control HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USA
Figure 3:RealTime(Ours) enables the robot to track the mouth’s pose and state, which enhances satisfaction, safety, comfort,
confidence, control, ease of use, bite timing, and responsiveness across various scenarios in comparison toOneTime[43].
Response options used across studies: SD (Strongly Disagree), D (Disagree), N (Neutral), A (Agree), SA (Strongly Agree).
questionnaires, they are seated and strapped into a wheelchair, and
asked to simulate three scenarios (Figure 3):
S1. Voluntary Head Movement: Participants initially face person
A, and open their mouth to initiate a bite. While the robot is moving
towards them to feed, upon an audio cue, they turn to person B as
if following a conversation.
S2. Voluntary Speaking: Participants initially face person C, and
open their mouth to initiate a bite. While the robot is moving
towards them to feed, upon an audio cue, they start reciting a
preset script, as if conversing with person C.
S3. Involuntary Head Movement (Spasm): For this scenario, par-
ticipants are first trained to mimic involuntary impulses, following
guidance from an occupational therapist. During the trial, partici-
pants initially face person C, and open their mouth to initiate a bite.
While the robot is moving towards them to feed, upon an audio
cue, participants simulate a sudden forward impulse.
Post-feeding, participants fill out a Likert survey on perceived
satisfaction, safety, and comfort [all scenarios], control and ease
[S1], control and bite timing [S2], and robot responsiveness [S3].
They are fed a total of 24 times (3 scenarios x 2 methods X 2 utensils
x 2 trials), with utensil and method orderings counterbalanced.
Study Results.RealTimeconsistently outperformsOneTime
in all scenarios (Figure 3). In S1,OneTimeoften misses the target
by aiming at the initial mouth position, whileRealTimeadapts to
mouth movements for accurate feeding. In S2,OneTimedisrupts
speech by continuing movement, whereasRealTimeis able to
perceive the participant’s mouth closing and pauses while they
are speaking. In S3,OneTimemaintains its movement towards the
participant, even if they spasm. In contrast,RealTimeimmediately
retracts upon detecting impulse, resuming feeding only when safe.
4.2  Physical Interaction-Aware Control Evaluation
We compare the performance of various time-series classification
models for physical interaction classification, and perform an abla-
tion study to evaluate the necessity of physical interaction-aware
control for inside-mouth bite transfer.
Eval. 1: Comparison between Models -We use data collected
with the 6 participants in Section 3.2, and consider two conditions:
A -Aggregated training and testing datasets from all 6 partici-
pants, maintaining an 80:20 split of each participant’s data.
B -Train on 5 participants, and test on the 6th, novel participant
in leave-one-participant-out cross validation fashion.
SVM exhibits superior performance across both conditions (Table
2), which is likely attributable to the low data regime. For all models,
combining haptic and visual modalities leads to superior perfor-
mance compared to using either modality in isolation. This finding
strongly advocates for the use of multimodal sensing for classifying
physical interactions. The reduction in performance from condition
A to B could stem from the unique traits of individual participants
affecting physical interaction, aligning with findings from previous
studies [15, 38].
Performance Improvement with Finetuning.We investigate
finetuning as a solution to the challenge of unique participant traits
impacting zero-shot performance of models on novel participants.
Table 2: Performance (F1 score) of physical interaction clas-
sification methods for inside-mouth bite transfer.
Method
All Participants AggregatedNovel Participant
AllHapticVisualAllHapticVisual
SVM [16]0.903   0.8570.860    0.8720.8340.649
MLP [30]0.8920.8450.8420.8710.842   0.712
TCN [34]0.8870.7870.6340.8620.7840.545
TST [48]0.9020.8310.8220.8560.8190.689
Figure 4: Confusion matrix showing multimodal SVM’s per-
formance for Condition B (Novel Participant).
HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USARajat Kumar Jenamani et al.
Figure 5: More physical-interaction aware control enhances perceived safety, satisfaction and comfort. This is supported by
quantitative data recorded by the force sensor.
We split the novel participant’s data into an 80:20 ratio, allocating
80% for finetuning and 20% for testing. We evaluate the increase in
performance of our best performing model, SVM, with incremental
amounts of finetuning datapoints. Results (Figure 6) show steady
performance improvement across modalities, with a significant
performance improvement even with a small number of data points
from the novel participant.
Eval. 2: Necessity of Physical Interaction-Aware Control -
We perform an ablation study to assess the importance of physical
interaction-aware control for inside-mouth bite transfers, especially
for individuals with severe mobility limitations. We consider a
scenario where an individual must have food placed on the right
side of their mouth due to an inability to bite in the center. When
caregivers place food in the center, the person guides them to the
correct position using their tongue. Once shown, they expect the
caregiver to remember this preference. This person also experiences
involuntary head movements, which can occur even while they eat.
Methods.We manipulate one within-subject variable: the ro-
bot’s level of physical-interaction awareness during feeding. We use
four methods that vary in their ability to distinguish between differ-
ent contact types, prompting the robot to switch to the appropriate
controller accordingly. In order of decreasing awareness:
•
Method A: Incidental vs. Impulsive vs. In-mouth Manipula-
tion vs. Bite classification.
•Method B: Incidental vs. Inside Mouth Non-bite (combining
impulsive and in-mouth manipulation) vs. Bite classification.
•Method C: Non-bite vs. Bite classification.
•Method D: Any Contact is Bite [43].
Figure 6: SVM’s classification performance on novel partici-
pants improves steadily with finetuning using their data.
Methods have access to the ground truth contact type for this
study; we also report offline classification accuracy.
Procedure.We conducted the study with 14 participants (8
males, 6 females; ages 21-27) who had no mobility limitations. After
providing demographics and completing pre-study questionnaires,
participants are seated and strapped into a wheelchair. They then
undergo training, under an occupational therapist’s guidance, to
realistically simulate the actions of the illustrated care recipient.
A trial in this study consists of two successive feedings using the
same method, in the following sequence:
1st Feeding: This feeding focuses on in-mouth manipulation. The
robot, initially stationary, begins moving when participants open
their mouth. Once the robot moves to the center of their mouth, it
says "push," prompting participants to move the food to the right
side with their tongue while keeping their head still. When the food
is correctly positioned, the robot signals "bite," and participants bite
down and wait for the robot to withdraw.
2nd Feeding: This feeding focuses on reaction to impulsive phys-
ical interactions and remembering preferred bite transfer location.
The robot, initially stationary, begins moving when participants
open their mouth. Once inside the mouth, the robot says “impulse,”
prompting participants to simulate an impulse. After the movement,
they keep their mouth open for five seconds. If the robot doesn’t
place the food on the right side of their mouth within that time,
participants have to adjust it with their tongue. When the food is
correctly positioned, the robot signals "bite," and participants bite
down and remain still until the robot withdraws.
Post-feeding, participants complete a Likert survey assessing
satisfaction, safety, and comfort for both feedings. Additionally,
the survey evaluates ease of moving the utensil for 1st Feeding
and whether the robot automatically moved food to the preferred
location for 2nd Feeding. Participants are fed a total of 32 times
(2 feedings x 4 methods x 2 utensils x 2 trials), with utensil and
method orderings counterbalanced.
Study Results.Figure 5 presents the study results. In the 1st
Feeding, which focuses on in-mouth manipulation, participants
predominantly preferMethod AandMethod B. These methods
switch to a force-tracking controller upon detecting in-mouth ma-
nipulation, making them easier for participants to manipulate with
their tongue compared toMethod C, which constantly maintains a
goal-tracking controller. This preference is quantitatively supported
Feel the Bite: Robot-Assisted Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer using Robust Mouth Perception and Physical Interaction-Aware Control HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USA
by the recorded force-torque data. In the 2nd Feeding, centered on
reacting to impulsive physical interactions and remembering user
preferences, participants rateMethod Athe highest. BothMethod
AandMethod Btransition to a force-tracking controller when
impulsive contact is detected, and are perceived as comfortable by
participants. However, participants note thatMethod Aremem-
bers their preferred transfer location, unlikeMethod B, which
cannot distinguish between in-mouth manipulation and impulsive
contacts.Method C, which continues with the goal-tracking con-
troller during the impulsive motion, is rated as uncomfortable. The
quantitative force-torque data show thatMethod Cexerts signifi-
cantly higher maximum force during an impulse as compared to
Method AandMethod B. AsMethod Cdoes not respond to
the impulsive contacts, it continues to move towards the preferred
position even after the impulse.Method D[43] retracts from the
mouth as soon as any contact is initiated during both 1st Feeding
and 2nd Feeding. Consequently, it is ranked as the least satisfying
method by the participants.
Classification Accuracy on Eval. 2 Study Data.For this anal-
ysis, we use our best-performing model, SVM, trained on 3072
physical interaction data points collected in Section 3.2, and test
on interaction data from this Eval. 2 study. This evaluation tests
the model’s generalization capabilities to more unstructured study
settings, compared to the controlled conditions of the prior data
collection. SVM achieves an F1 score of 0.719 zero-shot (Table 4).
In addition to distribution shifts caused by the unstructured study
setting and novel participants, this performance drop could also
be due to changes made to the robot system design between the
initial data collection and this ablation study, based on end-user
feedback. Inline with improvements seen with finetuning in Eval.
1, the model’s performance after further finetuning on 80% of each
participant’s data (approximately 10 data points per interaction
type) and testing on the remaining 20% of their data, significantly
improves to F1=0.772. These results underscore the importance of
evaluating finetuning in physical interaction classification mod-
els as a means to address various sources of distribution shifts in
real-world settings.
All study results are statistically significant (Wilcoxon Signed
Rank Test, p<0.05). Details on pilot studies, questions for each
measure, and classification results are in the Appendix [6].
Table 4: SVM’s performance (F1 Score) on Eval. 2 study data.
AllHapticVisual
Zero-Shot0.7190.6750.326
With Finetuning0.7720.6970.605
5  Full System Evaluation with Care Recipients
We evaluate our full system through a user study with 13 individuals
with severe mobility limitations, all of whom require assistance
with feeding. The objectives of this study were:
O1.To evaluate the effectiveness and acceptance of our inside-
mouth bite transfer system among its intended end users.
O2.Compare participant preferences between inside-mouth and
outside-mouth bite transfer [8] systems, when both options
are functionally possible for an individual.
Due to challenges in recruiting many individuals with mobility
limitations at any one place, this study took place at three sites:
EmPRISE Lab in Ithaca, NY, Columbia University Medical Center
in NYC, NY, and a participant’s home (Figure 7) in Taftville, CT.
5.1  Methods and Procedures
We considered two systems in this user study: (1) our proposed
inside-mouth bite transfer system, and (2) an outside-mouth bite
transfer system adapted from Bhattacharjee et al. 2020 [8] that stops
at a fixed distance (5 cms) from the user’s mouth.
We informed participants to focus on the interaction from when
the robot picks up a food item until they take a bite. Initially, we
guided them through practice runs for each method. We used two
utensils, a fork for cantaloupe and a spoon for yogurt. A trial in-
volved three successive feedings using the same utensil and bite
transfer system, after which we asked questions about their per-
ceived safety and comfort. We evaluated the inside-mouth bite
transfer system (O1) with all participants. We compared with the
outside-mouth bite transfer system (O2) only with participants who
demonstrated the required functional capability during practice
runs. Order of the two systems and utensils were counterbalanced.
After all trials, a final evaluation phase occurred where we fed
participants using inside-mouth bite transfer and asked them to
complete a TAM survey [18]. This was followed by a feedback in-
terview to perceive the significance of the key components of our
system and identify areas for improvement.
Table 3: Demographics of user study participants. All participants require assistance with feeding.
BiR - Bite Reflex, GaR - Gag Reflex, LR - Limited head/neck ROM, MaS - Masseter Spasticity, TS - Tongue Spasticity
ID   Age  Gender  RaceSelf-described impairment  Impairment time  Challenges with Feeding
P144FemaleCaucasian/WhiteMultiple Sclerosis25 yearsLR, Spasms
P233FemaleAfrican AmericanC3-C4 Spinal Cord Injury13 yearsLR, Spasms
P330MaleCaucasian/WhiteArthrogryposisSince BirthGaR, LR, MaS, TS
P445FemaleCaucasian/WhiteMultiple Sclerosis15 yearsLR
P526FemaleHispanicSchizencephaly QuadripelgiaSince BirthBiR, GaR, LR, MaS, Overbite, TS
P627MaleCaucasian/WhiteSpinal Muscular AtrophySince birthLR, MaS
P749FemaleHispanicC4-C5 Spinal Cord Injury28 yearsLR, Spasms
P844MaleCaucasian/WhiteC4-C5 Spinal Cord Injury24 yearsLR
P939FemaleAsian/Pacific IslanderSpinal Muscular AtrophySince BirthLR, MaS
P1048MaleAfrican AmericanC5-C6 Spinal Cord Injury2.5 yearsLR, TS
P1131FemaleAfrican AmericanCerebral Palsy QuadriplegiaSince BirthLR, TS
P1225MaleCaucasian/WhiteC4-C5 Spinal Cord Injury6 yearsLR
P1331FemaleAfrican AmericanArthrogryposisSince BirthLR, TS
HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USARajat Kumar Jenamani et al.
Figure 7: Left: Our inside-mouth bite transfer system feeding a care recipient in their home. Center: Inside-mouth bite transfer
challenges: P6 has limited mouth opening, P3 can bite only at left molars, P5’s weak jaw control causes incidental contacts, and
P1’s muscle spasms move her towards the utensil. Right: Our system received high ratings from care recipients for its safety
and comfort, and was favorably evaluated in terms of technology acceptance, as indicated by the results of the TAM survey.
5.2  Participants
The study involved 13 participants with diverse ages, genders, self-
described impairments, duration of impairments, and care providers
(Table 3). Some participants had complex medical conditions, mak-
ing feeding particularly challenging (Figure 7). For instance, P6 and
P9 have Spinal Muscular Atrophy, a condition known to reduce
maximum mouth opening and decrease bite force by almost 50%
[29]. P3 has an overbite and a sensitive gag reflex, which can be trig-
gered if a utensil presses on their tongue. For solid foods, they prefer
the utensil to approach from the left side of their mouth, depositing
the food on their left molars. P1, P2 and P7 experience spasms that
can happen unexpectedly. P5 is diagnosed with Schizencephaly,
which manifests with severe motor limitations (quadriplegia) and
poor jaw and tongue control for eating. They have severe spasticity
in their tongue, gag and bite reflexes, and an overbite.
All data collection and user studies in this paper were approved
by the Cornell University Institutional Review Board.
5.3  Findings
Our inside-mouth bite transfer system is perceived as safe
and comfortable.Figure 7 displays the results. P7 mentioned, "...
going in and out, I felt very comfortable, I felt safe, I enjoyed it..." P9
echoed, "... I think I was actually surprised... I liked it, the entrance
in and out..." P5’s parents were pleasantly surprised, "... I think it
worked really much better than I expected. When she moved her
mouth, it moved with her... She had fun with it!" P6 emphasized
the importance of placement, "The in-the-mouth method worked
very well. I was worried before doing it that it would go too deep,
and it didn’t. I think that making sure it goes in the right place is
important, and I think you did very well."
Users view the technology favorably.As per Figure 7, users
found the inside-mouth bite transfer system to be useful, easy to
use, have a positive attitude and intend to use it, and enjoy the
process. P2’s caregiver remarked, "... it will help a lot of people,
especially with her condition... it hurts me sometimes when she
can’t do certain things, so I’m glad." P6’s parents highlighted its
potential for social engagement, "[in a social setting,] the caregivers
all interact, and the kids are just passive recipients of food. So I
think this will involve them more in the eating."
Even among the few users able to perform outside-mouth
bite transfer, some preferred inside-mouth bite transfer.Out
of the 13 users, 9 were unable to lean forward for outside-mouth
bite transfer. Among the 4 users who evaluated both systems, some
preferred inside-mouth as they felt that outside-mouth bite transfer
requires more physical effort. P10 favored inside-mouth, saying
it "requires no movement of the neck." P12 and P4’s preferences
varied based on their physical state. P12 stated, "If I was having
neck pain, maybe I would prefer inside mouth so that I am not
moving as much." P11 consistently preferred outside-mouth, noting,
"I have the ability to position the food in my mouth myself, with
my own comfort."
Users highlight that continuous, real-time mouth percep-
tion and adaptive compliance are essential.P12 noted, "I could
be sitting in front of the TV watching something... I’m ready to
take a bite and then it catches my attention, or yeah, talking to
someone." P9 added another context: "When a phone rings, and I
turn around..." P7 emphasized the importance of device adaptability
during spontaneous movements, "On spasms. I mean, if it wiggles
with you, that would be perfect. The body can move when there is
a spasm, so it could go off a little and if it follows me, that’s great."
6  DISCUSSION
Our study demonstrates promising results, underlining the potential
feeding systems have to help improve the quality of life of care
recipients. However, the wide range of disabilities and individual
user needs makes crafting universal solutions complex. Participants
with unique challenges, like limited mouth opening, stressed the
importance of personalized adaptations. For instance, P6 and P9,
who have smaller mouth openings, suggested specifically designed
utensils, with P9 pointing out, "The spoon was too big." Similarly,
opinions on transfer speed varied: P11 described the robot as "a little
bit too fast," while P12 found it "too slow." These insights highlight
the need for adaptive algorithms and interfaces that are tailored
to individual needs, moving away from an one-size-fits-all model.
Additionally, while our study focuses on short-term interactions,
future work needs to explore long-term usability. Longitudinal
studies will offer a deeper insight into the prolonged impact of this
technology on users.
7  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partly funded by NSF IIS #2132846, CAREER #2238792,
and DARPA under Contract HR001120C0107. We would like to ac-
knowledge Taylor Sanchez, Megan Sofield, Shubhangi Sinha and
Skyler Valdez for their help with the user studies.
Feel the Bite: Robot-Assisted Inside-Mouth Bite Transfer using Robust Mouth Perception and Physical Interaction-Aware Control HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USA
References
[1]2024.  ATI F/T Sensor.    https://www.ati-ia.com/products/ft/sensors.aspx  (Ac-
cessed: 1st January, 2024).
[2]2024.   Kinova Gen3 6DoF Robotic Arm.https://www.kinovarobotics.com/
product/gen3-robots (Accessed: 1st January, 2024).
[3]2024.   Neater Eater Robot.https://www.neater.co.uk/neater-eater-robotic
(Accessed: 1st January, 2024).
[4]  2024. Obi.   https://meetobi.com (Accessed: 1st January, 2024).
[5]
2024. Robotic 2F-85 Gripper.   https://robotiq.com/products/2f85-140-adaptive-
robot-gripper (Accessed: 1st January, 2024).
[6]2024.  Supplementary Materials.https://emprise.cs.cornell.edu/bitetransfer/
(Accessed: 1st January, 2024).
[7]Suneel Belkhale, Ethan K Gordon, Yuxiao Chen, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Tapo-
mayukh Bhattacharjee, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2021. Balancing Efficiency and Comfort
in Robot-Assisted Bite Transfer.arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11401(2021).
[8]Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Ethan K Gordon, Rosario Scalise, Maria E Cabrera,
Anat Caspi, Maya Cakmak, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2020. Is more autonomy
always better? exploring preferences of users with mobility impairments in robot-
assisted feeding. In2020 15th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 181–190.
[9]
James Booth, Anastasios Roussos, Stefanos Zafeiriou, Allan Ponniah, and David
Dunaway. 2016. A 3d morphable model learnt from 10,000 faces. InProceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 5543–5552.
[10]Steven W Brose, Douglas J Weber, Ben A Salatin, Garret G Grindle, Hongwu
Wang, Juan J Vazquez, and Rory A Cooper. 2010. The role of assistive robotics in
the lives of persons with disability.AJPM&R(2010).
[11]
Alexandre Candeias, Travers Rhodes, Manuel Marques, Manuela Veloso, et al.
2018. Vision augmented robot feeding. InProceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops. 0–0.
[12]Qiong Cao, Li Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. 2018.
Vggface2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and age. In2018 13th IEEE
international conference on automatic face & gesture recognition (FG 2018). IEEE,
67–74.
[13]
Adriano Chiò, A Gauthier, A Vignola, Andrea Calvo, Paolo Ghiglione, Enrico
Cavallo, AA Terreni, and Roberto Mutani. 2006.   Caregiver time use in ALS.
Neurology67, 5 (2006), 902–904.
[14]J Chung, A Nagrani, and A Zisserman. 2018. VoxCeleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
Interspeech 2018(2018).
[15]Giovanni Cioffi, Silke Klose, and Arne Wahrburg. 2020. Data-efficient online clas-
sification of human-robot contact situations. In2020 European Control Conference
(ECC). IEEE, 608–614.
[16]Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector networks.Machine
learning20, 3 (1995), 273–297.
[17]Hang Dai, Nick Pears, William AP Smith, and Christian Duncan. 2017.  A 3d
morphable model of craniofacial shape and texture variation. InProceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 3085–3093.
[18]Fred D Davis, Richard P Bagozzi, and Paul R Warshaw. 1989.  User acceptance
of computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models.Management
science35, 8 (1989), 982–1003.
[19]
Laura E Dreer, Timothy R Elliott, Richard Shewchuk, Jack W Berry, and Patricia
Rivera. 2007.  Family caregivers of persons with spinal cord injury: Predicting
caregivers at risk for probable depression.Rehabilitation Psychology52, 3 (2007),
351.
[20]Nima Fazeli, Miquel Oller, Jiajun Wu, Zheng Wu, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and
Alberto Rodriguez. 2019. See, feel, act: Hierarchical learning for complex manip-
ulation skills with multisensory fusion.Science Robotics4, 26 (2019), eaav3123.
[21]Ryan Feng, Youngsun Kim, Gilwoo Lee, Ethan K Gordon, Matt Schmittle, Shivaum
Kumar, Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2019.  Robot-
assisted feeding: Generalizing skewering strategies across food items on a realistic
plate.arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02350(2019).
[22]Yao Feng, Haiwen Feng, Michael J Black, and Timo Bolkart. 2021. Learning an
animatable detailed 3D face model from in-the-wild images.ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG)(2021), 1–13.
[23]Felix Franzel, Thomas Eiband, and Dongheui Lee. 2021. Detection of Collaboration
and Collision Events during Contact Task Execution. In2020 IEEE-RAS 20th
International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids). IEEE, 376–383.
[24]Daniel  Gallenberger,  Tapomayukh  Bhattacharjee,  Youngsun  Kim,  and  Sid-
dhartha S Srinivasa. 2019.   Transfer depends on acquisition: Analyzing ma-
nipulation strategies for robotic feeding. In2019 14th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). IEEE, 267–276.
[25]Saskia Golz, Christian Osendorfer, and Sami Haddadin. 2015.   Using tactile
sensation for learning contact knowledge: Discriminate collision from physical
interaction. In2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 3788–3794.
[26]Ethan K Gordon, Xiang Meng, Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Matt Barnes, and
Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2020. Adaptive robot-assisted feeding: An online learning
framework for acquiring previously unseen food items. In2020 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 9659–9666.
[27]Ethan Kroll Gordon, Amal Nanavati, Ramya Challa, Bernie Hao Zhu, Taylor
Annette Kessler Faulkner, and Siddhartha Srinivasa. 2023.   Towards General
Single-Utensil Food Acquisition with Human-Informed Actions. InConference
on Robot Learning. PMLR, 2414–2428.
[28]
Ethan K Gordon, Sumegh Roychowdhury, Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Kevin
Jamieson, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2021.  Leveraging Post Hoc Context for
Faster Learning in Bandit Settings with Applications in Robot-Assisted Feeding.
In2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
10528–10535.
[29]M.W. Granger, P.H. Buschang, G.S. Throckmorton, and S.T. Iannaccone. 1999.
Masticatory muscle function in patients with spinal muscular atrophy.American
Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics115, 6 (1999), 697–702.   https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0889-5406(99)70296-9
[30]Simon Haykin. 1994.Neural networks: a comprehensive foundation. Prentice Hall
PTR.
[31]
Catrine Jacobsson, Karin Axelsson, Per Olov Österlind, and Astrid Norberg. 2000.
How people with stroke and healthy older people experience the eating process.
Journal of Clinical Nursing9, 2 (2000), 255–264.  https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-
2702.2000.00355.x
[32]
Sidney Katz, Amasa B Ford, Roland W Moskowitz, Beverly A Jackson, and Mar-
jorie W Jaffe. 1963. Studies of illness in the aged: the index of ADL: a standardized
measure of biological and psychosocial function.jama185, 12 (1963), 914–919.
[33]Alexandros Kouris, Fotios Dimeas, and Nikos Aspragathos. 2018. A frequency
domain approach for contact type distinction in human–robot collaboration.
IEEE robotics and automation letters3, 2 (2018), 720–727.
[34]
Colin Lea, Michael D Flynn, Rene Vidal, Austin Reiter, and Gregory D Hager.
2017. Temporal convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection.
Inproceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
156–165.
[35]
Michelle A Lee, Yuke Zhu, Krishnan Srinivasan, Parth Shah, Silvio Savarese, Li
Fei-Fei, Animesh Garg, and Jeannette Bohg. 2019. Making sense of vision and
touch: Self-supervised learning of multimodal representations for contact-rich
tasks. In2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
8943–8950.
[36]
Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael J Black, Hao Li, and Javier Romero. 2017. Learn-
ing a model of facial shape and expression from 4D scans.ACM Trans. Graph.36,
6 (2017), 194–1.
[37]Yunzhu Li, Jun-Yan Zhu, Russ Tedrake, and Antonio Torralba. 2019. Connecting
touch and vision via cross-modal prediction. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 10609–10618.
[38]Martina Lippi, Giuseppe Gillini, Alessandro Marino, and Filippo Arrichiello. 2021.
A Data-Driven Approach for Contact Detection, Classification and Reaction in
Physical Human-Robot Collaboration. In2021 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 3597–3603.
[39]J Lynch and R Cahalan. 2017. The impact of spinal cord injury on the quality of
life of primary family caregivers: a literature review.Spinal cord55, 11 (2017),
964–978.
[40]Rishabh Madan, Rajat Kumar Jenamani, Vy Thuy Nguyen, Ahmed Moustafa,
Xuefeng Hu, Katherine Dimitropoulou, and Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee. 2022.
Sparcs: Structuring physically assistive robotics for caregiving with stakeholders-
in-the-loop. In2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE, 641–648.
[41]Amal Nanavati, Patricia Alves-Oliveira, Tyler Schrenk, Ethan K Gordon, Maya
Cakmak, and Siddhartha S Srinivasa. 2023. Design principles for robot-assisted
feeding in social contexts. InProceedings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction. 24–33.
[42]Daehyung Park, Yuuna Hoshi, Harshal P. Mahajan, Ho Keun Kim, Zackory
Erickson, Wendy A. Rogers, and Charles C. Kemp. 2020. Active robot-assisted
feeding with a general-purpose mobile manipulator: Design, evaluation, and
lessons learned.Robotics and Autonomous Systems124 (2020), 103344.   https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.robot.2019.103344
[43]Lorenzo Shaikewitz, Yilin Wu, Suneel Belkhale, Jennifer Grannen, Priya Sundare-
san, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2023.  In-Mouth Robotic Bite Transfer with Visual and
Haptic Sensing. In2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 9885–9895.
[44]Samantha E. Shune. 2020.   An Altered Eating Experience: Attitudes Toward
Feeding Assistance Among Younger and Older Adults.Rehabilitation nursing :
the official journal of the Association of Rehabilitation Nurses(2020).
[45]Priya Sundaresan, Suneel Belkhale, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2023.  Learning visuo-
haptic skewering strategies for robot-assisted feeding. InConference on Robot
Learning. PMLR, 332–341.
[46]Danielle M Taylor. 2018.  Americans with disabilities: 2014.US Census Bureau
(2018), 1–32.
[47]Mei Wang, Weihong Deng, Jiani Hu, Xunqiang Tao, and Yaohai Huang. 2019.
Racial faces in the wild: Reducing racial bias by information maximization adap-
tation network. InProceedings of the ieee/cvf international conference on computer
HRI ’24, March 11–14, 2024, Boulder, CO, USARajat Kumar Jenamani et al.
vision. 692–702.
[48]George Zerveas, Srideepika Jayaraman, Dhaval Patel, Anuradha Bhamidipaty,
and Carsten Eickhoff. 2021. A Transformer-Based Framework for Multivariate
Time Series Representation Learning. InProceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery &amp; Data Mining(Virtual Event, Singapore)
(KDD ’21). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2114–2124.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3447548.3467401