Flying  Guide  Dog:  Walkable  Path  Discovery  for  the  Visually  Impaired
Utilizing  Drones  and  Transformer-based  Semantic  Segmentation
Haobin Tan
1
, Chang Chen
1
, Xinyu Luo
1
,
Jiaming Zhang
2
, Constantin Seibold
2
, Kailun Yang
2
and Rainer Stiefelhagen
2
Walkable path: "slightly left"
Semantic SegmentationInput Image
Traffic light:      "pedestrian-red" 
Field Test
Drone
Fig.  1:Flying  guide  dog  prototype.  Images  from  left  to  right  are:  field  test  in  front  of  an  intersection,  input  image  from  the  drone’s
perspective, semantic segmentation result, interpreted result with centroid, boundary and bounding boxes for the drone control algorithm.
Abstract— Lacking the ability to sense ambient environments
effectively, blind and visually impaired people (BVIP) face diffi-
culty in walking outdoors, especially in urban areas. Therefore,
tools for assisting BVIP are of great importance. In this paper,
we  propose  a  novel  “flying  guide  dog”  prototype  for  BVIP
assistance  using  drone  and  street  view  semantic  segmentation.
Based  on  the  walkable  areas  extracted  from  the  segmentation
prediction,  the  drone  can  adjust  its  movement  automatically
and  thus  lead  the  user  to  walk  along  the  walkable  path.  By
recognizing the color of pedestrian traffic lights, our prototype
can  help  the  user  to  cross  a  street  safely.  Furthermore,  we
introduce a new dataset named Pedestrian and Vehicle Traffic
Lights  (PVTL),  which  is  dedicated  to  traffic  light  recognition.
The result of our user study in real-world scenarios shows that
our prototype is effective and easy to use, providing new insight
into  BVIP  assistance.
I.  INTRODUCTION
It has been predicted that the number of blind and visually
impaired  people  (BVIP)  will  increase  to  more  than  115
million  by  2050  [1].  Lacking  the  ability  to  sense  ambient
environments effectively, they face difficulty in walking out-
doors, especially in urban areas. Therefore, assistive tools are
indispensable. Previous electronic assistance systems focused
on  providing  guiding  information  via  audio  [2]  or  tactile
feedback  with  wearable  equipment  [3].  Although  users  can
approach the destination based on these feedbacks, they need
to repeatedly finetune their orientation during the navigation.
To tackle this problem, we build a novel “flying guide dog”
prototype,  exploring  the  combination  of  drone  and  street
view  semantic  segmentation.  According  to  the  user  study
conducted in [4], drone navigation is more accurate and faster
as  it  gives  a  continuous  feedback  in  the  direction  of  travel.
Performing semantic segmentation on frames captured by the
This work was supported in part through the AccessibleMaps project by
the Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (BMAS) under the Grant
No.  01KM151112  and  in  part  by  the  University  of  Excellence  through
the  “KIT  Future  Fields”  project.
1
{firstname.lastname}@student.kit.edu,
2
{firstname.lastname}@kit.edu (correspondence: Jiaming Zhang).
Code   and   dataset   will   be   made   publicly   available   at:https://
github.com/EckoTan0804/flying-guide-dog.
drone’s camera, a variety of ambient visual information can
be extracted, such as sidewalks, crosswalks, and traffic lights.
Based on its perception of the environment, the drone adjusts
itself and leads the user to walk safely. To follow the drone,
the  user  holds  a  string  attached  to  the  drone.  Besides,  the
user receives voice prompts via a Bluetooth bone conduction
headphone.
Discovering  the  walkable  path  is  one  of  the  major  func-
tions of our prototype. Based on the segmentation prediction,
walkable area (e.g.sidewalks, crosswalks) can be discovered
by  their  corresponding  colors.  In  order  to  make  the  drone
keep  flying  along  the  walkable  path  safely,  we  develop  a
control algorithm so that the drone can automatically adjust
its direction and velocity according to the estimated centroid
of the sidewalk. Another function is assisting the user to pass
the pedestrian traffic light,i.e.street crossing. Our prototype
not  only  distinguishes  pedestrian  crossing  lights  from  other
types  of  traffic  lights  but  also  recognizes  their  color.  Since
there is currently no dedicated traffic light dataset containing
both pedestrian and vehicle traffic lights, we introduce a new
dataset calledPedestrian and Vehicle Traffic Lights (PVTL).
To  verify  the  effectiveness  of  our  system,  we  further
conduct  a  user  study  in  real-world  scenarios.  The  result
indicates that our prototype is effective for visually impaired
assistance and easy to use.
In summary, our contributions are summarized as follows:
•We  propose  a  novel  “flying  guide  dog”  prototype  uti-
lizing the drone and semantic segmentation, which can
effectively help BVIP to walk in urban scenarios safely.
•We develop a control algorithm to enable the drone to
fly along the walkable path automatically and to interact
with users via voice feedbacks in crossing streets.
•We  introduce  a  new  traffic  light  dataset  namedPedes-
trian and Vehicle Traffic Lights (PVTL), which focuses
on  recognizing  the  category  and  the  color  of  traffic
lights simultaneously.
arXiv:2108.07007v1  [cs.CV]  16 Aug 2021
Semantic
segmentation
Traffic light
classification
Adjust
velocities
Final prediction
Fusion
Send RC control
to drone
DJITelloPy
Street view 
semantic segmentation
Traffic light classification
Drone control
Fig. 2:System overview. There are three components: street view semantic segmentation, traffic light classification, and drone control.
II.  RELATEDWORK
Assistive  systems.A  variety  of  assistive  devices  dedicated
for  BVIP  have  been  developed.  A  guide-dog  robot  system,
which makes use of template matching-based crossing light
detection  and  Hough  transform-based  crosswalk  detection,
was designed for assisting the BVIP in self-walking [5]. In
order to help BVIP cross the street, Chenget al.[6] proposed
a real-time pedestrian crossing light detection algorithm for
the BVIP using histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) and
support vector machine (SVM) and integrated it into a wear-
able navigation system. Yanget al.[7] unified intersection-
centered  perception  tasks  by  utilizing  real-time  semantic
segmentation.  While  there  were  robotic  guide  dogs  [8],  [9]
and  drone-based  assistive  systems  [4],  [10]  for  BVIP,  we
pioneer to realize path discovery and intersection navigation
with semantic segmentation on drone videos.
Semantic   segmentation.As  a  seminal  work,  FCN  [11]
performs dense pixel-to-pixel classification in an end-to-end
manner.  Subsequent  networks  follow  the  per-pixel  recogni-
tion paradigm and significantly improve scene segmentation
performance. Introducing the global pyramid pooling feature,
PSPNet [12] embeds multi-scale scenery context features in
an  FCN-based  pixel  prediction  framework.  Recently,  non-
local  attention  layers  and  Multilayer  Perceptrons  (MLPs)
are  frequently  used  for  dense  prediction  tasks  like  image
semantic segmentation [13], [14]. In contrast to FCN-based
models, SegFormer [15] combines a hierarchical Transformer
[16] encoder and a lightweight All-MLP decoder. It yields a
powerful  representation  without  complex  and  computation-
ally demanding modules. Compared to existing systems that
use  FCN-based  semantic  segmentation  for  assisting  BVIP,
we build our flying guide dog system with SegFormer, which
can yield an efficient and robust segmentation.
III.  APPROACH
Our goal is to implement a “flying guide dog” prototype,
which  is  able  to  automatically  discover  walkable  areas  and
avoid  obstacles  so  that  it  can  guide  the  BVIP  person  to
walk  safely.  The  drone  is  connected  to  the  computer  using
DJITelloPy
1
library  via  Wifi.  For  each  frame  captured
by the drone’s camera, the semantic segmentor outputs a col-
orized prediction. To make the drone fly along the walkable
path, the largest walkable area is extracted and its centroid is
then estimated. On the basis of centroid estimation, velocity
adjustment  is  computed.  Meanwhile,  if  traffic  lights  are
detected,  we  crop  them  out  and  input  them  into  the  traffic
light classification model. Fusing the classification prediction
and velocity adjustment, a Radio Control (RC) command is
sent to the drone. Additionally, the user gets voice prompts
via a Bluetooth-connected bone conduction headphone.
As   illustrated   in   Fig.   2,   our   system   is   composed   of
three  main  modules:  (a)  street  view  semantic  segmentation
(Sec.  III-A),  (b)  traffic  light  classification  (Sec.  III-B),  and
(c) drone control (Sec. III-C).
A.  Semantic segmentation
Robustness  and  effeciency.A  vital  requirement  for  the
segmentation model is real-time performance. According to
the comparison of real-time semantic segmentation models,
SegFormer-B0 [15] has significant advantages on speed and
accuracy. Futhermore, it is more robust to common corrup-
tions and perturbations.
Datasets.  While  Cityscapes  [17]  are  recorded  in  a  unified
setting,  Mapillary  Vistas  [18]  are  globally  taken  by  diverse
devices  from  different  viewpoints.  Moreover,  comprising
25,000  densely  annotated  street  level  images  into  66  cate-
gories, Mapillary Vistas is 5×larger than Cityscapes in terms
of  fine-grained  annotations.  Therefore,  Mapillary  Vistas  is
more diverse and promising for yielding robust models, thus
suitable for our prototype.
Implementation  details.  We  train  SegFormer-B0  [15]  on
Mapillary Vistas [18] usingmmsegmentation
2
codebase
on  a  single  GTX  1080  Ti  GPU.  During  training,  we  apply
data  augmentation  techniques,  including  random  resizing
with  ratio  0.5-2.0,  random  horizontal  flipping,  and  random
cropping to 768×768. We train the model for 160K iterations
with AdamW optimizer. Initial learning rate is set to 6E−5
1
https://github.com/damiafuentes/DJITelloPy
2
https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmsegmentation
Others
Pedestrian-red
Pedestrian-green
Vehicle-red
Vehicle-green
Fig. 3:PVTL dataset with 5 categories. The “others” refers to side
or back of traffic lights and unilluminated traffic lights.
and  a  polynomial  learning  rate  decay  scheduler  with  factor
1.0 is employed, following the training strategy in [15].
B.  Traffic light classification
After semantic segmentation, a prediction mask regarding
traffic lights can be obtained. Based on the mask, the traffic
light  patch  can  be  cropped  from  its  full-resolution  image.
Performing  image  classification  in  a  cropped  patch  is  more
computationally   efficient   than   in   a   full-scale   image.   To
simplify and unify the recognition of the color and category
of traffic lights, we train a light CNN, which is expected to
be  more  accurate  and  efficient.  More  importantly,  it  should
eliminate the influence of vehicle traffic lights. Yet, currently
there is not a dataset directly suitable for our task.
PVTL  dataset.  To  facilitate  traffic  light  classification,  we
introduce a new dataset calledPedestrian and Vehicle Traffic
Lights  (PVTL)with  the  goal  of  distinguishing  pedestrian
traffic lights from vehicle traffic lights. We perform four steps
to collect this dataset. Firstly, we crop the traffic lights from
Cityscapes [17], Mapillary Vistas [18], and Pedestrian lights
[19] based on their annotations. Secondly, we clean up those
image patches with resolution smaller than 8×8. Then, we
manually annotate the images into 5 categories:{pedestrian-
red,  pedestrian-green,  vehicle-red,  vehicle  green,  others}.
Last but not least, a class balancing is performed to maintain
300 images for each class. We visualize some representative
examples  in  Fig.  3.  The  categoryothersrefers  to  the  side
and  back  of  the  traffic  lights  or  traffic  lights  that  are  not
illuminated. All data and annotations will be made publicly
available.
Pedestrian  light  prediction. As shown in Fig. 4, the input
of  the  model  is  the  traffic  light  patch  cropped  from  every
single frame when crossing traffic light intersections. In order
to  eliminate  the  influence  of  vehicle  traffic  lights,  we  keep
only the pedestrian light prediction and discard others. Each
prediction will be appended to the buffer list, whose length
is 7 frames. Based on the accumulated predictions, the most
frequent  class  is  output  as  the  final  traffic  light  prediction,
which can robustify the system and ensure the safety.
C.  Drone control
After  achieving  semantic  segmentation  and  traffic  light
classification, four types of velocity are calculated to control
the drone, as depicted in Fig. 5. Among them, the up/down
velocityv
ud
is  obtained  by  the  Tello’s  vision  positioning
Model
Pedestrian
traffic light?
Append
to list
Discard
len(list)>=7?
No
Yes
No
Prediction
Cropped traffic lights
Most frequent
element
Final prediction
Yes
Fig. 4: Multi-frame based traffic light classification.
system to maintain the flying heighth
target
, which is preset as
1.2mto ease the user interaction. Finally, RC commands are
sent to the drone usingDJITelloPy. A detailed description
of the control strategy is presented in Algorithm 1.
Fly along walkable path. Based on the mask of the walkable
path  (e.g.  sidewalksandcrosswalks),  the  largest  walkable
areaL
walkable
is  cropped  from  the  colorized  predictionC.
Through the image moment ofL
walkable
, the centroid of the
walkable  area  is  computed.  Smoothing  the  position  of  the
contour  centroid  with  high-pass  and  low-pass  filters  makes
the movement more stable. Horizontal difference between the
filtered  centroid  and  the  center  of  the  whole  image  is  used
as the reference of the left/right velocityv
lr
. The horizontal
adjustment  is  important  to  prevent  most  of  collisions  and
assist  BVIP  to  walk  safely.  After  adjusting  the  left/right
velocity,  the  drone  can  constantly  fly  in  the  middle  of  the
walkable path.
In order to fly towards the direction of a walkable path, the
yaw velocityv
yaw
is required to veer. Motivated by [20], the
image with the largest walkable area is further divided into
three  partitions  horizontally.  Then  the  confidencecon ffor
each part, the mean of the pixel values, is compared with a
pre-adjusted thresholdθ
con f
to obtain the final binary control
codelist
codes
. Each control code is assigned to separate yaw
speedv
yaw
inlist
yaws
.
Fusion with traffic light classification. When encountering
a traffic light during walking, the drone control with a preset
forward velocityv
f,0
will be updated and integrated with the
traffic  light  recognition.  If  the  pedestrian  traffic  light  turns
green, the drone accelerates forward. If it is red, the forward
velocity  is  set  to  0  and  the  drone  will  hover  in  place  until
the light turns green. If the light changes from green to red
during crossing, the drone will maintain the adjusted velocity.
Voice  feedback.At  each  step  of  traversing  the  pedestrian
traffic lights, voice prompts (i.e.speech) will be sent to the
user  through  the  bone  conduction  headset,  such  as  “stop”
at  the  red  light  and  “go”  at  the  green  light.  Using  voice
Left/Right
velocity
Yaw velocity
Forward
velocity
Up/Down velocity
Walkable
path
RC
control
DJITelloPy
Colorized prediction
 Forward velocity
(Fused with traffic
light classification)
Detect
pedestrian
light?
Fig. 5:Drone control overview. Four types of velocity are updated
based on the walkable path and the traffic light prediction.
Algorithm  1:Drone control
input  :colorized predictionC∈R
H×W×3
, pedestrian
crossing lightcolor∈{red,green,None},
current altitudeh
output:up/down velocityv
ud
, yaw velocityv
yaw
, left/right
velocityv
lr
, forward velocityv
f
1Initialize parameters: pixel thresholdθ
con f
, target altitude
h
target
, speed ups peedu p, up/down velocityv
ud
, forward
velocityv
f,0
; lists: preset yaw velocitieslist
yaws
,   binary
control codelist
codes
;
2start
crossing←false;
3whiledrone is flying and video stream is ondo
// Maintain target altitude
4ifh6=h
target
then
5v
ud
←(h
target
−h)/h
target
∗v
ud
;
6end
// Fly along walkable path
7Extract largest walkable areaL
walkable
fromC;
8(x
centroid
,y
centroid
)←estimatecentroid(L
walkable
);
9v
lr
←x
centroid
−
W
2
;
10(R
l
,R
m
,R
r
)←partition(L
walkable
);
11forp∈(R
l
,R
m
,R
r
)do
12con f←mean(p);
13code←binaryconversion(con f,θ
con f
);
14Appendcodetolist
codes
;
15end
16v
yaw
←get
yawvel(list
yaws
,list
codes
);
// Fusion with traffic light
classification
17ifcolor=Nonethen
18v
f
←v
f,0
;
19else  ifcolor=green or start
crossingthen
20v
f
←v
f,0
+s peedu p;
21startcrossing←true;
22else
23v
f
←0;
24end
25end
feedback  can  always  keep  a  certain  safe  distance  between
the user and the drone.
IV.  EXPERIMENTS
A.  Semantic segmentation results
Overall   result.  To  investigate  the  training  procedure  of
SegFormer-B0 [15] on Mapillary Vistas [18], we present the
logging  of  training  loss  in  Fig.  6a  and  the  one  of  accuracy
in Fig. 6b, which are measured in every 50 iterations. In the
first few hundred iterations, the loss drops dramatically. After
25,000 iterations, the loss and accuracy start to converge and
remain  relatively  steady.  After  training  for  160K  iterations,
SegFormer-B0 yields 41.83% mean Intersection over Union
(mIoU) on validation set of Mapillary Vistas, with the shorter
side of input image being 1024.
Per-class  result.  Intersection  over  Unions  (IoUs)  of  some
categories  of  interest  for  BVIP  and  related  to  our  task  are
reported in Table I. SegFormer-B0 [15] achieves compelling
results  on  categories  that  are  significant  for  walkable  area
discovery,  such  asRoad(85.20%),Sidewalk(62.32%),  and
Land  Marking  -  Crosswalk(63.80%),  which  guarantee  the
accuracy  and  effectivness  of  our  system.  Moreover,  the
050010001500200025003000
Iterations (×50)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Loss
(a) Loss
050010001500200025003000
Iterations (×50)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Accuracy
(b) Accuracy
Fig. 6:Training Loss (left) and accuracy (right) of SegFormer-B0
[15] on Mapillary Vistas [18].
TABLE I:Per-class IoU of SegFormer-B0 [15] on Mapillary Vistas
[18] validation set in 1024×2048 resolution.
CategoryIoU
Bike Lane31.87
Crosswalk - Plain21.09
Curb53.20
Pedestrian Area31.24
Road85.20
Sidewalk62.32
Lane Marking - Crosswalk63.80
Traffic Light61.06
Traffic Sign (Front)68.67
Car86.84
model  obtains  61.06%  accuracy  of  theTraffic  Light,  thus
it can generate a sufficient patch for the downstream traffic
light classification.
Comparison  to  state-of-the-art  methods.Based  on  the
evaluation  on  Mapillary  Vistas  [18],  Table  II  summarizes
results including frame per second (FPS), mIoU, and param-
eters. Compared to other real-time approaches (e.g.RGPNet
[21]),   SegFormer-B0   [15]   achieves   comparable   accuracy
with  significantly  fewer  parameters,  which  shows  great  po-
tential for deployment on edge devices and mobile devices.
Note  that  to  propose  a  novel  network  is  not  our  scope  in
this  work,  instead  to  introduce  the  feasibility  of  deploying
a  Transformer-based  semantic  segmentation  model  on  the
assistive system. Besides, our system can be constructed by
arbitrary efficient backbones.
TABLE  II:Comparison  of  state-of-the-art  methods  on  Mapillary
Vistas  [18]  validation  set.  Inference  speed  (FPS)  is  calculated  on
1024×2048 image resolution.
MethodFPS↑mIoU(%)↑Params  (M)↓
Non Real-Time
BiSeNet (R101) [22]9.320.450.1
TASCNet (R50) [23]11.946.432.8
TASCNet (R101) [23]8.848.851.8
ShelfNet (R101) [24]9.149.257.7
RGPNet (R101) [21]10.850.252.2
RGPNetB(WRN38) [21]3.453.1215.0
Real-Time
RGPNet (HarDNet39D) [21]34.742.59.4
RGPNet (R18) [21]35.741.717.8
SegFormer-B0 (ours)15.241.83.8
B.  Qualitative comparison
Fig.  7  depicts  the  qualitative  results.  For  images  taken
from  the  pedestrian’s  point-of-view  (POV),  models  trained
on  Cityscapes  is  almost  unable  to  segment  the  sidewalk
from the road. This result may be explained by the fact that
images  of  Cityscapes  [17]  are  taken  by  a  camera  mounted
behind the vehicle’s windshield,i.e., from the vehicle’s POV.
Accordingly,  the  models  lack  the  ability  of  generalization
to  segment  images  from  the  viewpoints  of  the  pedestrian.
OriginalMobileNetV3
Cityscapes
SegFormer
Cityscapes
SegFormer
Mapillary
Crosswalk - Plain
Road
Sidewalk
Lane Marking - Crosswalk
Sky
Vegetation
Traffic Light
Traffic Sign (Front)
Car
Fig. 7:Qualitative results of predictions of different models trained
on  different  datasets.  Compared  to  models  trained  on  Cityscapes
[17], SegFormer-B0 [15] trained on Mapillary Vistas [18] segments
sidewalk and crosswalk much better.
In contrast, SegFormer-B0 trained on Mapillary Vistas [18]
outputs  a  clearly  better  segmentation  between  sidewalks,
crosswalks, and roads, thanks to diverse viewing perspectives
in the training samples.
C.  Traffic light classification results
As  shown  in  Table  III,  we  first  construct  our  light  CNN
model  which  contains  5  convolutional  layers  and  3  fully
connected  layers.  In  addition,  we  fine-tune  ResNet-18  [25]
as our alternative. Both models are trained on PVTL dataset
for  25  epochs.  Compared  with  ResNet-18,  our  light  CNN
model  is  slightly  less  accurate  but  more  lightweight  and
computationally efficient.
TABLE III:Comparison of traffic light classification models.
ModelsResNet-18 [25]Light CNN
Weight  InitializationPretrained on ImageNetDefault
Accuracy↑90%83%
FPS↑167670
#Params  (M)↓11.62.4
Flops  (GFLOPs)↓7.20.35
D.  Runtime analysis
The  drone  we  adopt  for  runtime  measurement  is  DJI
Tello.  Equipped  with  a  RGB  camera,  it  supports  720p  HD
transmission. To handle image processing, model inference,
and  further  drone  control,  we  utilize  a  laptop  with  an  Intel
i7  CPU  and  an  Nvidia  GeForce  GTX  1050  Ti  GPU.  After
warming  up  for  200  frames,  we  measure  and  average  the
runtime  of  the  subsequent  800  frames.  As  summarised  in
Table  IV,  the  mean  processing  time  of  a  single  frame  at
the  resolution  of  320×240  is  85ms,  mostly  on  semantic
segmentation  (71ms).  In  other  words,  the  speed  of  our
prototype is 11.7 FPS.
TABLE  IV:Running  time  analysis.  “Others”  refers  to  the  time
that costs for frame transmission, velocity adjustment, and sending
RC command.
Models
SegFormer [15] +
ResNet-18 [25]
SegFormer [15] +
Light CNN
Segmentation  (ms)↓7071
Classification  (ms)↓1814
Others  (ms)↓11
All  (ms)↓8985
FPS↑11.27411.713
E.  User study
To evaluate the assistance functions of our system, an user
study in real world scenarios is conducted using NASA Task
Load Index (NASA-TLX) method [26].
User  study  setup.  During  the  user  study,  we  use  the  same
hardware setup as in Section IV-D. The laptop is placed in a
backpack, as shown in Fig. 8a. Six participants aged between
24 and 35, including 5 males and 1 female, are sighted but
blindfolded during the test to simulate BVIP. The drone flies
in  front  of  the  participants  to  simulate  the  real  guide  dog
and  to  get  an  unobstructed  view  of  the  environment.  The
participant  follows  the  drone  by  feeling  the  traction  from  a
string attached to the drone.
Our  prototype  is  evaluated  in  two  open-space  scenarios,
as exhibited in Fig. 8. The first scenario focuses on walking
along the sidewalk in 20 meters length. Some obstacles, such
asbicyclesandpedestrians, were randomly appeared in the
sidewalk  to  test  the  obstacle  avoiding  function.  The  second
scenario,  an  intersection  including  vehcile  and  pedestrian
traffic lights, is selected to test the street crossing functional-
ity according to the pedestrian light prediction. After testing,
participants  fill  multi-aspected  questionnaires  based  on  the
six categories listed in Table V. They score each aspect from
1 to 10, among which 1 and 10 meanstrongly disagreeand
strongly agree, respectively.
Evaluation.  A  radar  graph  assessing  multiple  aspects  is
shown in Fig. 9. For features of walking along the walkable
path,OrientationandPosition, participants find it reliable for
guiding, citing that they can even avoid obstacles using this
system. In terms ofPhysically easy to useandLearnability,
they also make positive comments. After a brief introduction
the  participants  are  able  to  use  the  system  alone.  However,
(a) Sidewalk(b) Street crossing
Fig. 8:User study consists of two scenarios: (a) sidewalk (b) street
crossing. To simulate visually inpaired people, the participant wears
a blindfold during the user study.
TABLE V:Six aspects of the user study questionnaire.
AspectsStatements
OrientationI can walk in the proper direction.
PositionI can walk in the middle of the path.
Traffic LightI can cross the road at the right time according
to the pedestrian lights.
LearnabilityI can get familiar with this system easily.
Mentally
easy to use
I  don’t  need  much  time  to  think  to  follow  the
drone.
Physically
easy to use
I  don’t  need  to  put  in  a  lot  of  physical  effort
when using the system.
Fig.  9:Evaluation  results  of  the  user  study.  Average  scores  are
given by participants
theTraffic  lightfeature  still  needs  to  be  improved.  It  could
be  harder  to  cross  the  street  with  a  series  of  pedestrian
lights  for  wrongly  guiding  users  to  the  pedestrian  zone  in
the  middle.  To  tackle  this  issue,  the  speed  of  drone  can
be  adjusted  during  crossing  via  the  aforementioned  drone
control  algorithm.  The  participants  also  rate  the  feature
Mentally  easy  to  uselower  than  others,  as  sometimes  it  is
insufficient  to  feel  the  traction  from  the  connected  string.
This  issue  is  subsequently  improved  with  additional  voice
feedback using a wireless bone conduction headphone, which
aims to alert users the walking direction and the color of the
pedestrian  light.  Despite  a  limited  number  of  participants,
most of them comment that the function of our prototype is
indeed very helpful for people with visual impairment, which
proves the usability and effectiveness of our flying guide dog
prototype.
V.  CONCLUSION
In  this  work,  we  propose  a  novel  “flying  guide  dog”
prototype.  Combining  street  view  semantic  segmentation,
traffic  light  classification,  and  drone  control  algorithm,  our
prototype is capable to automatically discover the walkable
path,  avoid  obstacles,  and  thus  guide  the  user  walk  safely.
Moreover, to better distinguish pedestrian traffic lights from
other  types  of  traffic  lights,  we  set  up  a  new  dataset  called
PVTL.  Results  of  the  user  study  suggest  that  our  approach
is effective for BVIP assistance.
Nonetheless, the prototype is limited by the drone’s battery
capacity, which can only support maximal 13 minutes flight
time. Another major limitation is that the drone is too light
to  resist  the  wind.  A  reasonable  approach  to  tackle  these
issues  could  be  to  use  a  more  powerful  drone  with  larger
battery capacity. In the future, we plan to explore the usage of
embedded AI computers such as Nvidia Jetson AGX Xavier
and Jetson Nano to improve portability.
REFERENCES
[1]  R. R. A. Bourneet al., “Magnitude, temporal trends, and projections
of  the  global  prevalence  of  blindness  and  distance  and  near  vision
impairment:   a   systematic   review   and   meta-analysis,”The   Lancet
Global Health, 2017.
[2]  A. Fiannaca, I. Apostolopoulos, and E. Folmer, “Headlock: A wearable
navigation  aid  that  help  blind  cane  user  traverse  large  open  spaces,”
ASSETS, 2014.
[3]  H.  Wang,  R.  K.  Katzschmann,  S.  Teng,  B.  Araki,  L.  Giarr
 ́
e,  and
D. Rus, “Enabling independent navigation for visually impaired people
through a wearable vision-based feedback system,” inICRA, 2017.
[4]  M. Avila Soto, M. Funk, M. Hoppe, R. Boldt, K. Wolf, and N. Henze,
“DroneNavigator:   Using   leashed   and   free-floating   quadcopters   to
navigate visually impaired travelers,” inASSETS, 2017.
[5]  Y.  Wei  and  M.  Lee,  “A  guide-dog  robot  system  research  for  the
visually impaired,” inICIT, 2014.
[6]  R.  Cheng,  K.  Wang,  K.  Yang,  N.  Long,  J.  Bai,  and  D.  Liu,  “Real-
time  pedestrian  crossing  lights  detection  algorithm  for  the  visually
impaired,”Multimedia Tools and Applications, 2018.
[7]  K. Yang, R. Cheng, L. M. Bergasa, E. Romera, K. Wang, and N. Long,
“Intersection  perception  through  real-time  semantic  segmentation  to
assist navigation of visually impaired pedestrians,” inROBIO, 2018.
[8]  T.-K. Chuanget al., “Deep trail-following robotic guide dog in pedes-
trian  environments  for  people  who  are  blind  and  visually  impaired-
learning from virtual and real worlds,” inICRA, 2018.
[9]  A. Xiao, W. Tong, L. Yang, J. Zeng, Z. Li, and K. Sreenath, “Robotic
guide dog: Leading a human with leash-guided hybrid physical inter-
action,”arXiv, 2021.
[10]  F. Huppert, G. Hoelzl, and M. Kranz, “GuideCopter-A precise drone-
based haptic guidance interface for blind or visually impaired people,”
inCHI, 2021.
[11]  J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks
for semantic segmentation,” inCVPR, 2015.
[12]  H. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Qi, X. Wang, and J. Jia, “Pyramid scene parsing
network,” inCVPR, 2017.
[13]  S. Chen, E. Xie, C. Ge, D. Liang, and P. Luo, “CycleMLP: A MLP-
like architecture for dense prediction,”arXiv, 2021.
[14]  J.  Zhang,  K.  Yang,  A.  Constantinescu,  K.  Peng,  K.  M
 ̈
uller,  and
R.  Stiefelhagen,  “Trans4Trans:  Efficient  transformer  for  transparent
object  segmentation  to  help  visually  impaired  people  navigate  in  the
real world,” inICCVW, 2021.
[15]  E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo,
“SegFormer:  Simple  and  efficient  design  for  semantic  segmentation
with transformers,”arxiv, 2021.
[16]  A. Vaswaniet al., “Attention is all you need,” inNeurIPS, 2017.
[17]  M.  Cordtset  al.,  “The  cityscapes  dataset  for  semantic  urban  scene
understanding,” inCVPR, 2016.
[18]  G.  Neuhold,  T.  Ollmann,  S.  Rota  Bulo,  and  P.  Kontschieder,  “The
mapillary vistas dataset for semantic understanding of street scenes,”
inICCV, 2017.
[19]  J. Roters, X.  Jiang, and K.  Rothaus, “Recognition of traffic  lights in
live video streams on mobile devices,”TCSVT, 2011.
[20]  I.-H.  Hsieh,  H.-C.  Cheng,  H.-H.  Ke,  H.-C.  Chen,  and  W.-J.  Wang,
“Outdoor  walking  guide  for  the  visually-impaired  people  based  on
semantic segmentation and depth map,” inICPAI, 2020.
[21]  E. Arani, S. Marzban, A. Pata, and B. Zonooz, “RGPNet: A real-time
general purpose semantic segmentation,” inWACV, 2021.
[22]  C.  Yu,  J.  Wang,  C.  Peng,  C.  Gao,  G.  Yu,  and  N.  Sang,  “BiSeNet:
Bilateral segmentation network for real-time semantic segmentation,”
inECCV, 2018.
[23]  J. Li, A. Raventos, A. Bhargava, T. Tagawa, and A. Gaidon, “Learning
to fuse things and stuff,”arXiv, 2018.
[24]  J. Zhuang, J. Yang, L. Gu, and N. Dvornek, “ShelfNet for fast semantic
segmentation,” inICCVW, 2019.
[25]  K.  He,  X.  Zhang,  S.  Ren,  and  J.  Sun,  “Deep  residual  learning  for
image recognition,” inCVPR, 2016.
[26]  S. G. Hart, “NASA-task load index (NASA-TLX); 20 years later,” in
Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society  Annual
Meeting, 2006.