System  Configuration  and  Navigation  of  a  Guide  Dog  Robot:
Toward  Animal  Guide  Dog-Level  Guiding  Work
Hochul Hwang
†
, Tim Xia
†
, Ibrahima Keita, Ken Suzuki, Joydeep Biswas
1
, Sunghoon I. Lee
∗
, and Donghyun Kim
2
Abstract— A   robot   guide   dog   has   compelling   advantages
over   animal   guide   dogs   for   its   cost-effectiveness,   potential
for  mass  production,  and  low  maintenance  burden.  However,
despite  the  long  history  of  guide  dog  robot  research,  previous
studies  were  conducted  with  little  or  no  consideration  of  how
the  guide  dog  handler  and  the  guide  dog  work  as  a  team
for  navigation.  To  develop  a  robotic  guiding  system  that  is
genuinely beneficial to blind or visually impaired individuals, we
performed qualitative research, including interviews with guide
dog  handlers  and  trainers  and  first-hand  blindfold  walking
experiences  with  various  guide  dogs.  Grounded  on  the  facts
learned   from   vivid   experience   and   interviews,   we   build   a
collaborative  indoor  navigation  scheme  for  a  guide  dog  robot
that  includes  preferred  features  such  as  speed  and  directional
control.  For  collaborative  navigation,  we  propose  a  semantic-
aware local path planner that enables safe and efficient guiding
work by utilizing semantic information about the environment
and  considering  the  handler’s  position  and  directional  cues  to
determine  the  collision-free  path.  We  evaluate  our  integrated
robotic  system  by  testing  guide  blindfold  walking  in  indoor
settings  and  demonstrate  guide  dog-like  navigation  behavior
by  avoiding  obstacles  at  typical  gait  speed  (0.7 m/s).
I.  INTRODUCTION
According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), more
than 2.2 billion people in the world have near or distance vi-
sion impairments [1]. Guide dogs (GD) have been considered
as an effective way to improve the mobility and independence
of visually impaired individuals [2]–[4]. However, only about
2% of blind people in the U.S. work with guide dogs [5], and
the percentage is expected to decrease worldwide mainly due
to the lack of supply. Fundamental challenges of expanding
the supply are the significant cost and time that are required
to  train,  deploy,  and  maintain  animal  guide  dogs.  The  cost
for  training  one  guide  dog  is  over  $50,000  USD  and  the
time  for  breeding,  raising,  training,  and  deploying  takes  up
to  two  years.  Guide  dogs’  work  span  is  typically  less  than
ten  years  and  they  require  lifelong  care  from  their  handler,
including medical care, feeding, and daily walks. As a result,
they are not suitable for people who cannot raise a dog due
to  various  reasons,  such  as  financial  affordability,  allergies,
and  physical  limitations  (e.g.,  due  to  motor  impairments  or
natural aging) [2], [4], [6]. To remedy the issues and embrace
the potential of mass production, a cost-effective and sustain-
able  guide  dog  robot  could  be  a  significant  contribution  to
the visually impaired population.
†
Authors contributed equally,
∗
Co-corresponding author
1
University of Texas at Austinjoydeepb@cs.utexas.edu
2
University   of   Massachusetts   Amherst,   140   Governors   Dr,   U.S.
donghyunkim@cs.umass.edu
Fig.  1.Development  of  a  guide  dog  robot  based  on  qualitative  research.
Summer collaboratively works with the handler by reflecting the handler’s
directional suggestions to reach the destination in a safe and efficient manner
by seamlessly avoiding obstacles similar to an animal guide dog.
This   strong   need   inspired   researchers,   and   various
navigation-assistant devices have been developed for a long
time.   The   early   study   by   [7]   evidenced   how   a   robotic
system  can  support  the  navigation  works  of  a  person  with
visual  impairment.  Multiple  wheeled  mobile  robots  have
been  developed  from  1976  to  1983  and  demonstrated  au-
tonomous  navigation  and  obstacle  avoidance  while  guiding
a person [8]. On the other hand, researchers also developed
various  forms  of  assistive  devices  such  as  smart  canes  [9],
[10], vibrating belts [11], hand-held camera traversability es-
timators [12], and head mount devices [13]. Throughout the
research,  the  perception  assistant  has  been  actively  studied,
but the mobility of the assistant device was less highlighted.
The  recent  progress  in  locomotion  control  of  quadruped
robots  opened  the  chance  to  utilize  the  legged  robots  for
guide dog robots, and several studies using a quadruped robot
have been reported [14]–[16]. However, we discover that the
existing guide dog robots do not adequately address how the
handlers  interact  with  their  animal  guide  dogs  in  the  real
world,  which  has  been  established  over  several  decades  to
support comfortable mobility and navigation efficiency.
For  example,  having  a  rigid  connection  is  crucial  for
arXiv:2210.13368v1  [cs.RO]  24 Oct 2022
the  handlers  to  perceive  the  motion  of  the  guide  dog  and
navigate  in  a  safe  manner  [17].  In  addition,  positioning
the  handler  right  next  to  the  robot  is  important  to  navigate
through  sharp  turns  and  narrow  paths.  However,  [14],  [15]
used a soft leash and [16] located a person behind a robot.
Moreover,  previous  studies  have  mainly  focused  on  robot
control  under  the  handler’s  pulling  force  or  autonomous
navigation  rather  than  interactive  communication  during  a
guiding work of a handler-guide dog unit. Besides the handle
design  and  the  handler’s  position,  various  aspects  should
be  considered  in  the  guiding  system  design.  Rich  literature
about  guide  dog  work  and  training  methods  exists  [18]–
[20], but less guidelines have been disclosed for even basic
robot specifications such as size, weight, battery life, sensors,
walking  speed,  required  robustness  of  walking  controllers,
and  so  on  [6].  For  the  navigation  algorithm  development,
we  have  to  precisely  understand  the  roles  of  a  handler  and
a  dog  because  guiding  work  is  different  from  autonomous
driving, which brings a person to the target location without
intermittent direction commands from the driver.
In  this  study,  we  aim  to  identify  important  design  com-
ponents of a guide dog robot to support effective navigation
and obstacle avoidance based on the established interaction
mechanisms  between  the  handler  and  animal  guide  dogs.
To  understand  the  interaction  mechanisms,  we  conducted
interviews with guide dog handlers and trainers, followed by
several  observation  sessions  to  investigate  how  the  handler
navigates with the guide dog in real-world settings. Our team
also  performed  blindfold  walking  with  four  different  guide
dogs  under  a  guide  dog  trainer’s  supervision  to  understand
the   navigation   process   better.   Based   on   qualitative   data
analysis, we configure the development directions of a guide
dog  robot  and  build  an  interactive  navigation  scheme  and
local path planning algorithm.
In  terms  of  hardware  design,  we  adopted  the  handle
developed for animal guide dog users and installed a custom-
designed  button  interface  to  allow  the  handlers  to  adjust
speed  and  give  walking  direction  cues,  which  are  the  most
frequently  used  cues  in  guiding  work.  The  handle  can  be
completely  detachable  from  the  robot’s  body  to  help  the
handlers to easily keep the robot underneath their seat when
they  use  public  transportation.  For  the  local  path  planner,
we  primarily  focus  on  rapid  response  to  the  environment
change  to  safely  navigate  a  dynamic  environment.  Special
effort is made to enable seamless pedestrian avoidance while
maintaining  the  handler’s  normal  walking  speed  to  provide
a comfortable guiding work experience.
The  proposed  semantics-aware  local  path  planner  selects
a  path  from  a  cost  map  made  with  a  pretrained  semantic
segmentation  network  [21]  without  extra  geometrical  route
computation  to  save  computation  power.  In  addition,  our
method  relies  only  on  built-in  RGB  cameras  without  depth
estimation  and  a  standard  NVIDIA  GPU  computing  unit.
Similar  navigation  approaches  that  use  pretrained  image
processing backbones [22], [23] have been proposed, but less
have been explored to directly utilize semantic segmentation
as  a  local  path  planner.  [24]  proposed  to  utilize  off-the-
TABLE I
PARTICIPANT DEMOGRAPHICS
SubjectAgeGenderExperience  (years)Session  type
H0160F36Interview, observation
H0269M30Interview, observation
H0363M11Interview, observation
H0469F30Interview, observation
H0559M21Interview, observation
T0165M45Interview
T0252M19Interview, observation
T0358M35Interview, observation
shelf  semantic  segmentation  for  indoor  mobile  robots  but
did  not  deploy  the  methods  on  actual  robotic  systems.  [25]
explored  the  idea  of  indoor  navigation  based  on  semantic
segmentation,  in  which  they  trained  various  segmentation
networks  and  analyzed  their  computational  efficiency,  and
in  [26],  [27],  the  researchers  deployed  semantic  segmen-
tation  on  an  actual  robot  for  indoor  navigation,  and  both
relied  on  the  egocentric  view  of  the  segmented  scene  for
target  point  creation  and  subsequent  target  point  following.
However,  such  methods  are  sensitive  to  the  noise  of  the
segmentation  network,  which  is  inappropriate  for  safety-
critical applications. Our planner provides robustness against
the segmentation error by employing simple cost map-based
path selection and rule-based stop criteria.
Primary  contributions  of  our  work  are  summarized  as
follows: 1) human-centered system integration of a guide dog
robot based on qualitative research with guide dog handlers
and  trainers,  2)  development  of  a  guiding  work  framework
with a safety-oriented local path planner that imitates animal
guide dogs’ navigation works, and 3) experimental evaluation
of the robot in real-world indoor environments and demon-
stration  of  animal  guide  dog-like  behavior  at  a  preferred
walking speed. The video
II.  GUIDE DOG ROBOT CONFIGURATION
Guide dogs work with the handler as a team, called aunit,
to  safely  navigate  to  the  desired  destination.  Also,  unlike
a  white  cane,  guide  dogs  provide  efficient  navigation  by
seamlessly avoiding obstacles at a walking speed. Based on
qualitative  research  with  five  guide  dog  handlers  (GDHs)
and three guide dog trainers (GDTs), we discovered 1) core
components  that  must  be  considered  when  developing  a
guide dog robot to ensure safety and 2) advanced components
to  enhance  efficiency  in  navigation  and  increase  comfort
for  the  handler.  We  elaborate  on  our  guide  dog  robot’s
configuration  by  specifying  the  hardware  requirements  for
real-world  deployment.  The  participants’  demographics  are
summarized in Table I.
A.  Hardware requirements to serve as a guide dog robot
To address the various physical attributes of various blind
or visually impaired individuals, guide dog trainers walk with
the potential guide dog handler beforehand and match with
the appropriate guide dog considering features including the
size and pulling force. For a guide dog robot, compact size
and small weight are desirable as they allow handlers to be
Pulling force (N)
01 0 02 0 03 0 0
0
2 0
4 0
(sec)
(c)
Guide dog 1
Guide dog 2
(a)
3 kg
(b)
Fig.  2.Pulling  force  measurement  of  animal  guide  dogs  and  the  guide
dog robot, Summer. (a) We performed blindfold walk with different guide
dogs.  A  digital  force  gauge  was  used  to  measure  the  pulling  force  while
walking. (b) Go1’s built-in controller is evaluated on a testbed that pulls the
robot  with  the  horizontal  force  up  to34.32 N(3.5 kg).  (c)  Pulling  forces
measured during blindfold walking with two different guide dogs.
able  to  independently  carry  and  put  the  robot  under  seats,
especially when they use public transportation such as buses,
trains, or taxi cabs. For an animal dog, this can be easier as
they have a flexible body as one of the handlers mentioned:
“Whereas  a  guide  dog,  being  squishy,  you  train
him  to,  even  a  dog  his  size,  get  on  the  floor  area
and lay down.”-H01
Although  minimizing  the  weight  is  beneficial  for  porta-
bility,  it  should  still  be  heavier  than  a  certain  mass  to
handle the nominal pulling force of a handler and to address
emergent  stops.  To  identify  the  range  of  pulling  force  in
guide dog work, we measured the pulling force with a force
gauge  during  our  blindfold  walking  with  different  dogs  as
in  Fig.  2’  (a).  We  found  that  the  pulling  force  of  a  guide
dog  remained  mostly  under40Neven  in  the  case  of  a
dog  with  strong  pulling  strength  (guide  dog  1  in  Fig.  2
(c)). We experimentally validated that the robot’s locomotion
controller  is  robust  enough  to  manage  a  similar  external
disturbance by letting the robot walk while being pulled by
3 kgweight as shown in Fig. 2 (b).
B.  Core components in GD work to ensure safety
1)  Rigid connection and correct positioning:
“I  think  it  can’t  be  done  without  some  sort  of
device  that  you  have  some  sort  of  handle.  . . .
Because,  when  you’re  working  with  whatever  to
get someplace, you are feeling that thing move. . . .
if I’m holding a dog or holding a two-point handle
to something if it stops, I would stop.”-H01
As one of the GDH subjects mentioned, in guide dog work,
the  rigid  connection  between  the  handle  and  the  guide  dog
is critical. Most guide dog handlers primarily use a harness
while  walking  since  it  can  provide  instant  feedback  of  the
(a)(b)
Fig.  3.Observation  of  the  guide  dog  handler’s  walking  with  their  guide
dogs.  (a)  The  handler-guide  dog  unit  is  turning  based  on  the  handler’s
directional  cue.  (b)  The  handler-guide  dog  units  are  seamlessly  avoiding
obstacles (e.g., a chair, a tree, and a person) in their local community.
guide  dog’s  motion  while  it  is  challenging  to  interpret  the
motion of the guide dog using only a soft leash.
Walking  at  a  proper  position  relative  to  the  guide  dog
(next to the dog’s hindquarters) while walking is also critical
for  various  safety  purposes.  For  example,  when  the  animal
guide  dog  stops  at  a  curb,  the  handler  can  use  the  foot
within  a  single  step  to  reach  out  to  recognize  and  locate
the curb. Also, it is ideal to be in the recommended position
to reduce the range of motion and turning speed for safety.
Additionally, note that most guide dogs are trained to walk
on  the  handler’s  left-hand  side  because  most  handlers  are
right-handed. This enforces the handler to use their left hand
to  hold  the  harness  handle  and  to  use  their  right  hand  to
perform additional tasks or search around when a dog stops.
This  setup  can  be  uncomfortable  for  left-handed  handlers,
but  it  is  hard  to  accommodate  them  because  switching  the
position requires additional training.
Considering  the  aforementioned  safety  concerns,  we  use
a  rigid  harness  handle  structure  provided  by  Ruffwear.  The
length-adjustable design is expected to support various poten-
tial handlers, having different physical features, to maintain
the  proper  position  while  walking.  On  top  of  the  safety
benefits, the rotating handle structure enables easy transition
between  left-handed  and  right-handed  handlers.  Also,  the
detachable  harness  structure  is  desirable  considering  the
handler’s portability.
2)  Collaborative navigation:Unlike autonomous naviga-
tion, in most guiding work, the handler needs to provide cues
to  the  guide  dog  to  some  extent,  especially  when  initiating
turns and deciding when to cross a street, which can also be
observed in Fig 3 (a). In the basic setup between a handler
and a guide dog, the handler is responsible for knowing the
directions to the target location based on cognitive maps and
making  decisions  about  whether  it  is  safe  to  make  a  move
by interpreting nonvisual information [19], [28].
“We  have  to  have  some  idea  of  where  you  want
to go. So it becomes the person’s job to tell them
straight, forward, left, right, find the way, look for
whatever they’re aiming for.”-T03
We  implement  such  collaborative  navigation  by  1)  de-
signing  a  button  interface  that  takes  the  combination  of
touch  sensor  signals  provided  by  the  handler  as  input  and
2) allowing our proposed semantics-aware local path planner
to take this input into the path selection process. With such
implementation, Summer interprets the handler’s directional
suggestions to safely take turns when available.
Based  on  the  feedback  obtained  from  the  GDHs,  we
designed a wireless button interface that allows the handler
to  suggest  directional  cues  to  Summer.  We  minimized  the
number of buttons to reduce the complexity of usage. These
two  buttons  are  digitally  connected  to  an  Arduino  Nano
which  is  attached  to  a  Bluetooth  HC-05  module.  Note  that
the  wireless  communication  paradigm  allows  the  harness
handle  to  maintain  its  detachability.  With  a  single  press  of
the button, a handler can give a directional command to the
local path planner that takes the command into consideration
when deciding the most desirable path which the details are
provided in Section III.
C.  Advanced components in GD work to enhance efficiency
and comfort
1)  Seamless  obstacle  avoidance  at  high  walking  speed:
Guide  dogs  not  only  ensure  the  safety  of  the  handler  by
avoiding  collision  but  they  allow  higher  travel  speed  by
seamlessly  maneuvering  around  obstacles  that  we  found
from interviews and the observation session (Fig 3(b)). This
smooth mobility is difficult to get with a white cane because
a  user  needs  to  find  a  way  to  avoid  obstacles  in  a  zig-zag
manner based on tactile information [29]. One of the guide
dog trainers gives a clear idea of how seamlessly an animal
guide dog can avoid obstacles.
“Little  bumps  in  the  road  and  you’ll  realize  that
sometimes if there’s a bunch of obstacles, whether
it’s  traffic  cones,  trees,  fire  hydrants,  whatever  it
is, you might never know them there. You can have
a  guide  dog  for  10  years  and  you’ll  go,  ‘Oh  I
didn’t  know  that  was  there,’  because  the  dog  just
fluidly goes around. It’s a little different than using
your cane where your cane you’re aware of all the
obstacles.”-T03
Here,  we  focus  on  developing  a  local  path  planner  to
provide smooth obstacle avoidance in guiding work without
slowing down or stopping the handler unless they are neces-
sary as explained in Section III-B. We also allow the handler
can  control  the  walking  speed  using  the  button  interface
because  the  walking  speed  varies  by  handlers;  the  dog’s
walking  speed  is  one  of  the  most  important  parameters  to
matching a proper handler-guide dog unit.
”Fidelco  (training  school),  before  they  give  you
a  dog,  will  match  up  your  walking  speed  with  a
harness that they pull around to see how fast, slow,
medium, or fast.”-H03
The  walking  speed  can  be  controlled  incrementally  by
pressing the button consecutively. As an example, the walk-
Fig. 4.   Handle interface design that features speed/direction control button,
adjustable handle, and detachable hook for portability.
ing speed of Summer will increase by0.05 m/sif the upper
button is pressed twice as shown in Fig. 4.
III.  GUIDING WORK FRAMEWORK
As explained in Section. II-B.2, a handler provides orien-
tation  cues  such  as  forward,  left,  or  right  and  a  guide  dog
take  care  of  local  path  planning  by  safely  and  seamlessly
avoid  collision  or  other  risk  for  the  handler.  Based  on  the
standard  guiding  work  setup,  we  focused  on  developing  a
local  path  planner  that  can  provide  rapid  response  to  the
environment  change,  avoiding  various  obstacles  including
walking  pedestrians  without  incurring  uncomfortable  jerky
movements  or  sudden  stops  unless  they  are  necessary.  One
challenge  was  avoiding  walking  pedestrians  coming  from
opposite  direction  while  maintaining  the  handler’s  walking
speed. Considering the average speed of humans (≈1 m/s)
and perception camera sight (2−3 m), the robot has around
only1 sbefore  it  hit  the  person.  Therefore,  we  targeted  to
maximize the update frequency by removing computationally
complex  process  and  by  minimizing  sensor  inputs.  Our
image segmentation-based local planner plans and evaluates
paths  at  a  rate  of  20  Hz  and  is  capable  of  robust  static
and dynamic obstacle avoidance. Here we present the main
components of our navigation pipeline.
A.  Local path planner
We  assume  the  robot  is  constantly  moving  forward,  and
employ  a  local  planner  based  on  a  trajectory  roll-out  algo-
rithm that samples 40 trajectories parameterized by minimum
and  maximum  curvature.  The  40  curvatures  are  rolled  out
in  front of  Summer  and each  is  then individually  evaluated
according  to  length  and  visual  cost.  At  each  time  step,  the
best  path  is  selected  and  Summer  adjusts  its  steering  angle
according to the curvature of the selected best path.
In  order  to  evaluate  the  visual  cost  associated  with  the
rolled-out trajectories, a visual cost map is built based on the
semantic  categories  of  the  objects  in  the  Summer’s  field  of
view. We use the front- and side-facing camera equipped on
Summer as our main input. The camera operates at the rate
of30 fps, and two464×400sized RGB images are streamed
Traj. Rollout
jj
Bird Eye View
Segmentation
Mobile
Net
Local Cost Map
Lowest Cost Path
Direction Suggestion
Steering
&
Velocity
Speed Control
Evaluate
Navigation Input
Command 
Output
Semantic Aware Local Path Planner
Button Control
Left View
Front View
Fig. 5.Navigation pipeline. Images from front and side camera are passed into a segmentation network. The segmented images are then projected down
to bird-eye-view and subsequently converted into a binary traversable and non-traversable local cost map. Trajectories are rolled out on this cost map. The
button  interface  is  used  to  bias  trajectory  selection.  When  the  best  path  is  selected,  the  steering  command  is  fed  into  the  built-in  controller.  The  button
interface can also be used to adjust the forward velocity of the controller. Velocity is also adjusted based on cost boxes in the front and the left local cost
maps in case of emergencies for obstacle clearing.
from Summer to a laptop in the form of ROS messages [30].
Once  the  image  is  received  by  the  laptop,  it  is  processed
by  a  pretrained  network  with  a  MobileV2Dialted  encoder
[31]  and  a  convolutional  decoder  and  converted  into  two
464×400sized matrix, where pixel values are converted into
one of 150 semantic classes. As we are only concerned about
the  traversable  class,floor,  all  150  classes  are  converted
into  binary  classes,  i.e.,floor= 0vs.non-floor= 1.  The
resulting binary464×400matrices are then scaled by 200
and converted  into a  grayscale  image. The  grayscale image
is  then  mapped  down  to  BEV  using  a  homography  matrix
and is used as a cost map to evaluate trajectories.
B.  Trajectory  adjustment,  emergency  stop,  and  path  clear-
ance
We augmented the trajectory roll-out algorithm by simul-
taneously rolling out parallel trajectories, thus evaluating an
extended  trajectory  space  that  takes  into  account  Summer’s
body  width  as  well  as  the  handler’s  position.  Furthermore,
we implemented an emergency stop mechanism in the form
of  a  visual  cost  box  located  directly  in  front  of  Summer  in
it’s BEV local cost map. If an obstacle comes too close into
proximity  or  if  navigation  itself  chose  the  wrong  path  and
was  heading  straight  into  an  obstacle,  then  the  segmented
object  or  non-traversable  path  would  enter  the  visual  cost
box,  and  based  on  a  cost  threshold,  the  forward  velocity
command  will  halt,  preventing  Summer  and  the  handler
from  crashing  into  the  obstacle.  An  additional  cost  box  is
instantiated in Summer’s left BEV local cost map. The logic
of  the  mechanism  is  identical,  however,  this  box’s  function
is to instruct Summer to step to the right whenever there is
not enough space on it’s left side for the handler to traverse.
C.  Handler’s direction and speed control
When  the  up  button  attached  to  the  handle  is  pressed,  a
right turn command is issued, and this influences the trajec-
tory  evaluation  algorithm  by  reducing  the  costs  assigned  to
the paths that lead to the right side, thereby biasing Summer
to turn right. The same mechanism applies to the left when
the  down  button  is  pressed.  Moreover,  we  implemented  a
speed control mechanism, where if the up button is pressed
twice,  Summer’s  forward  velocity  increases,  enabling  the
guided unit to traverse at a faster pace. The same mechanism
applies to slowing down if the down button is pressed twice.
IV.  EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
To demonstrate the robustness of the proposed local path
planner,  we  performed  blindfold  guiding  work  in  two  dif-
ferent  indoor  environments,  which  differ  in  basic  layout,
flooring, and wall texture. In the first environment, the total
length  of  the  navigation  task  is105 m,  and  in  the  second
environment, the total length of the navigation task is90 m.
In  both  environments,  the  task  is  to  traverse  through  a
hallway  while  avoiding  collision  with  static  and  dynamic
obstacles.  Obstacles  included  in  the  experiments  are  card
boxes,  blue  mats,  trash  cans,  a  wet  sign,  and  a  moving
person.  Both  environments  contain  turns  where  the  handler
needs  to  issue  directional  commands  and  a  long  hallway
where  the  path  is  cluttered  with  obstacles  as  close  as2 m
apart. During the experiment, a sighted person is blindfolded
and  acts  as  a  handler.  The  handler  is  situated  on  the  left
side  of  Summer  to  demonstrate  that  the  handle  can  be
easily adjusted for handedness preferences. An operator will
be  following  the  handler  while  carrying  a  GPU-containing
laptop. In real guiding work, a handler gives direction cues,
but  in  our  experiment,  the  operator  provides  signals  on
when  to  give  directional  cues  to  the  handler  because  the
blindfolded handler is not well accustomed to the layout of
the test environments.
A.  Obstacle Avoidance and Command Following
In  both  environments,  Summer  and  the  handler  success-
fully complete the task without a third person’s intervention
except  for  the  operator’s  directional  cues.  During  the  tests,
Summer  smoothly  walks  around  obstacles  and  keeps  itself
and  the  handler  from  collision.  In  cases  where  the  turn
is  narrow,  Summer  stops  and  relies  on  its  left  visual  cost
map to adjust its position such that the handler has enough
traversable space. In walking pedestrian avoidance, Summer
leverages its high-frequency planner and responsibly swerves
(a) Static obstacle avoidance 
Avoiding 
card box
(c) Side way obstacle clearance
Object blocking 
handler's path
Side stepping to 
clear the obstacle
Robot Path
Alt. Path
Pedestrian
Static Obstacle
Cost Box
Best Trajectory
Pedestrian
Camera Man
Start/End Position
Direction Command
A
B
s
s
A
A
B
B
(b) Dynamic obstacle avoidance
Planning path to 
avoid pedestrian
First Environment
Second Environment
(f) Traversing narrow pathway
(d) Segmenting construction area
(e) Avoiding unplanned obstacle
1.5m
s
s
Segmentation of 
construction scene
Avoiding unplanned
large trash carrier
Traversing in 
narrow path
Path (Brown)
Construction (Blue)
Trash
Bin
Trash
Bin
Trash
Bin
Fig. 6.Indoor guiding work experiments(a) The bird-eye view and the cost map show how the robot recognize the environment and convert the view
to  the  cost  map.  Among  the  40  path  candidates  (green),  the  path  with  minimal  cost  is  selected  (red).  (b)  The  right  image  shows  how  the  pedestrian  is
represented  in  the  cost  map.  (c)  Summer  uses  a  side-view  camera  to  secure  the  enough  traversable  space  for  the  handler.  When  upcoming  obstacles  are
detected, which is shown as the white area under the red cost box in the cost map, Summer makes side stepping until the obstacle is cleared. (d) (e) Our
method  can  find  a  path  as  long  as  the  side  walk  is  properly  detected.  Therefore,  guiding  work  is  robust  to  the  situations  where  unfamiliar  objects  exist
(e.g., construction site) (f) Summer can navigate through narrow path with1.5 mwidth.
around  the  incoming  person.  Because  the  direction  com-
mand  does  not  override  but  only  biases  the  path  selection
algorithm,  the  timing  of  the  command  does  not  need  to
be  precise.  In  our  experiments,  as  long  as  the  blindfolded
handler issued a direction cue before the turn, Summer was
able to follow the direction issued by the handler.
B.  Robust Behavior in Unplanned Scenarios
Several  unplanned  scenarios  occurred  during  the  experi-
mentation  process.  Construction  took  place  in  one  experi-
mental condition that drastically changed the appearance of
the  hallway  and  reduced  the  width  of  the  traversable  area.
Despite the appearance change, the reduction in traversable
area, vaguely identified objects, Summer finds a traversable
path  as  long  as  the  side  walk  is  properly  detected,  which
is  true  most  cases.  Another  unplanned  scenario  occurred
when a large trash carrier was placed on the planned route,
blocking a significant portion of the traversable area. Despite
this,  Summer  was  able  to  successfully  navigate  around  the
obstacle.
V.  CONCLUSIONS
In  this  letter,  we  present  a  safe  and  resource-light  guide
dog  robot  that  is  designed  based  on  insights  gathered  from
qualitative research. We utilize two built-in RGB cameras on
the  Go1  robot  and  an  off-the-shelf  semantic  segmentation
network  to  establish  a  local  path  planner.  We  implement
navigational mechanisms that allows the robot to stop during
emergencies  and  avoid  obstacles  while  accounting  for  the
robot’s  body  and  position  of  the  human  handler.  Custom
harness  handle  interface  is  designed  and  fabricated  for  the
interactive guiding work. Finally, we demonstrate the robust-
ness of our method in two different indoor environments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The study materials used in this study has been reviewed
and  approved  by  the  University  of  Massachusetts  Amherst
IRB,  Federal  Wide  Assurance  #  00003909  (protocol  ID:
3124).   We   acknowledge   Unitree   Robotics   for   providing
a  Go1  robot  featured  with  low-level  controller  accessible
software  and  for  technical  support  to  enable  this  study.  We
also acknowledge Ruffwear for providing the initial harness
design suitable for our application.
REFERENCES
[1]  Blindness   and   vision   impairment.   World   Health   Organization.
[Online].Available:https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/blindness-and-visual-impairment
[2]  R. J.-T. Miner, “The experience of living with and using a dog guide,”
RE: view, vol. 32, no. 4, p. 183, 2001.
[3]  L. Whitmarsh, “The benefits of guide dog ownership,”Visual impair-
ment research, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 27–42, 2005.
[4]  C. Wiggett-Barnard and H. Steel, “The experience of owning a guide
dog,”Disability  and  Rehabilitation,  vol.  30,  no.  14,  pp.  1014–1026,
2008.
[5]  Faqs.   Guiding   Eyes   for   the   Blind.   [Online].   Available:   https:
//www.guidingeyes.org/about/faqs/
[6]  M.  A.  Hersh  and  M.  A.  Johnson,  “A  robotic  guide  for  blind  people.
part 1. a multi-national survey of the attitudes, requirements and pref-
erences  of  potential  end-users,”Applied  Bionics  and  Biomechanics,
vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 277–288, 2010.
[7]  S. Tachi and K. Komoriya, “Guide dog robot,”The Robotics Research
2  (The  Second  International  Symposium  1984),  vol.  2,  pp.  333–349,
1985.
[8]  Guide dog robot (meldog). Tachi Laboratory, The University of Tokyo.
[Online]. Available: https://tachilab.org/en/projects/meldog.html
[9]  M.  H.  A.  Wahab,  A.  A.  Talib,  H.  A.  Kadir,  A.  Johari,  A.  Noraziah,
R.  M.  Sidek,  and  A.  A.  Mutalib,  “Smart  cane:  Assistive  cane  for
visually-impaired people,”CoRR, vol. abs/1110.5156, 2011. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1110.5156
[10]  P.  Slade,  A.  Tambe,  and  M.  J.  Kochenderfer,  “Multimodal  sensing
and  intuitive  steering  assistance  improve  navigation  and  mobility  for
people  with  impaired  vision,”Science  Robotics,  vol.  6,  no.  59,  p.
eabg6594, 2021.
[11]  E.  J.  A.  Prada  and  L.  M.  S.  Forero,  “A  belt-like  assistive  device
for visually impaired people: Toward a more collaborative approach,”
Cogent Engineering, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 2048440, 2022.
[12]  N.  Hirose,  A.  Sadeghian,  M.  V
 ́
azquez,  P.  Goebel,  and  S.  Savarese,
“Gonet:  A  semi-supervised  deep  learning  approach  for  traversability
estimation,”CoRR,  vol.  abs/1803.03254,  2018.  [Online].  Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03254
[13]  S.  S.  Bhatlawande,  J.  Mukhopadhyay,  and  M.  Mahadevappa,  “Ultra-
sonic spectacles and waist-belt for visually impaired and blind person,”
in2012  National  Conference  on  Communications  (NCC),  2012,  pp.
1–4.
[14]  A. Xiao, W. Tong, L. Yang, J. Zeng, Z. Li, and K. Sreenath, “Robotic
guide  dog:  Leading  a  human  with  leash-guided  hybrid  physical  in-
teraction,”  in2021  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Robotics  and
Automation (ICRA).    IEEE, 2021, pp. 11 470–11 476.
[15]  Y. Chen, Z. Xu, Z. Jian, G. Tang, Y. Yangli, A. Xiao, X. Wang, and
B.  Liang,  “Quadruped  guidance  robot  for  the  visually  impaired:  A
comfort-based approach,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03927, 2022.
[16]  K. A. Hamed, V. R. Kamidi, W.-L. Ma, A. Leonessa, and A. D. Ames,
“Hierarchical  and  safe  motion  control  for  cooperative  locomotion  of
robotic  guide  dogs  and  humans:  A  hybrid  systems  approach,”IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 56–63, 2019.
[17]  J.  Guerreiro,  D.  Sato,  S.  Asakawa,  H.  Dong,  K.  M.  Kitani,  and
C.  Asakawa,  “Cabot:  Designing  and  evaluating  an  autonomous  nav-
igation   robot   for   blind   people,”   inThe   21st   International   ACM
SIGACCESS conference on computers and accessibility, 2019, pp. 68–
82.
[18]  M. Tucker,The Eyes that lead.    Howell, 1984.
[19]  W.  R.  Wiener,  R.  L.  Welsh,  and  B.  B.  Blasch,Foundations  of
orientation and mobility.    American Foundation for the Blind, 2010,
vol. 1.
[20]  C. Bane,Forward Together.    Independently published, 2020.
[21]  B.    Zhou,    H.    Zhao,    X.    Puig,    S.    Fidler,    A.    Barriuso,    and
A. Torralba, “Semantic understanding of scenes through the ADE20K
dataset,”CoRR,   vol.   abs/1608.05442,   2016.   [Online].   Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.05442
[22]  S.  Gupta,  J.  Davidson,  S.  Levine,  R.  Sukthankar,  and  J.  Malik,
“Cognitive  mapping  and  planning  for  visual  navigation,”CoRR,  vol.
abs/1702.03920,  2017.  [Online].  Available:  http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.
03920
[23]  Y.  Zhu,  R.  Mottaghi,  E.  Kolve,  J.  J.  Lim,  A.  Gupta,  L.  Fei-Fei,
and  A.  Farhadi,  “Target-driven  visual  navigation  in  indoor  scenes
using   deep   reinforcement   learning,”   2016.   [Online].   Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05143
[24]  W. Kim and J. Seok, “Indoor semantic segmentation for robot navigat-
ing on mobile,” in2018 Tenth International Conference on Ubiquitous
and Future Networks (ICUFN), 2018, pp. 22–25.
[25]  Y.  Yeboah,  C.  Yanguang,  W.  Wu,  and  Z.  Farisi,  “Semantic  scene
segmentation   for   indoor   robot   navigation   via   deep   learning,”   in
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Robotics, Control
and Automation, ser. ICRCA ’18.    New York, NY, USA: Association
for  Computing  Machinery,  2018,  p.  112–118.  [Online].  Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3265639.3265671
[26]  M.  Adachi,  S.  Shatari,  and  R.  Miyamoto,  “Visual  navigation  using
a  webcam  based  on  semantic  segmentation  for  indoor  robots,”  in
2019  15th  International  Conference  on  Signal-Image  Technology  &
Internet-Based Systems (SITIS), 2019, pp. 15–21.
[27]  D.  Teso-Fz-Beto
 ̃
no,  E.  Zulueta,  A.  S
 ́
anchez-Chica,  U.  Fernandez-
Gamiz, and A. Saenz-Aguirre, “Semantic segmentation to develop an
indoor  navigation  system  for  an  autonomous  mobile  robot,”Mathe-
matics, vol. 8, p. 855, 05 2020.
[28]  N.  A.  Giudice  and  G.  E.  Legge,  “Blind  navigation  and  the  role  of
technology,”The engineering handbook of smart technology for aging,
disability, and independence, vol. 8, pp. 479–500, 2008.
[29]  A. D. P. dos Santos, F. O. Medola, M. J. Cinelli, A. R. Garcia Ramirez,
and F. E. Sandnes, “Are electronic white canes better than traditional
canes?  a  comparative  study  with  blind  and  blindfolded  participants,”
Universal  Access  in  the  Information  Society,  vol.  20,  no.  1,  pp.  93–
103, 2021.
[30]  Stanford  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  et  al.,  “Robotic  operating
system.” [Online]. Available: https://www.ros.org
[31]  M.    Sandler,    A.    G.    Howard,    M.    Zhu,    A.    Zhmoginov,    and
L.    Chen,    “Inverted    residuals    and    linear    bottlenecks:    Mobile
networks  for  classification,  detection  and  segmentation,”CoRR,  vol.
abs/1801.04381,  2018.  [Online].  Available:  http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.
04381