Who Let The Dogs Out?
Modeling Dog Behavior From Visual Data
Kiana Ehsani
1
, Hessam Bagherinezhad
1
, Joseph Redmon
1
Roozbeh Mottaghi
2
, Ali Farhadi
1,2
1
University of Washington,
2
Allen Institute for AI (AI2)
Abstract
We study the task of directly modelling a visually intel-
ligent agent.  Computer vision typically focuses on solving
various subtasks related to visual intelligence.  We depart
from this standard approach to computer vision; instead we
directly model a visually intelligent agent. Our model takes
visual information as input and directly predicts the actions
of the agent.  Toward this end we introduceDECADE, a
dataset  of  ego-centric  videos  from  a  dog’s  perspective  as
well as her corresponding movements.  Using this data we
model how the dogactsand how the dogplansher move-
ments.  We show under a variety of metrics that given just
visual input we can successfully model this intelligent agent
in many situations. Moreover, the representation learned by
our model encodes distinct information compared to repre-
sentations trained on image classification, and our learned
representation can generalize to other domains. In particu-
lar, we show strong results on the task of walkable surface
estimation and scene classification by using this dog mod-
elling task as representation learning. Code is available at
https://github.com/ehsanik/dogTorch.
1. Introduction
Computer vision research typically focuses on a few well
defined tasks including image classification, object recogni-
tion, object detection, image segmentation, etc. These tasks
have organically emerged and evolved over time as proxies
for the actual problem of visual intelligence.  Visual intel-
ligence spans a wide range of problems and is hard to for-
mally define or evaluate.  As a result, the proxy tasks have
served the community as the main point of focus and indi-
cators of progress.
We value the undeniable impact of these proxy tasks in
computer vision research and advocate the continuation of
research  on  these  fundamental  problems.   There  is,  how-
ever, a gap between the ideal outcome of these proxy tasks
and  the  expected  functionality  of  visually  intelligent  sys-
t
t+1
t+2
t+3
action?
Acting like a dog
Planning like a dog
t
t+N
sequence of actions? 
Learning from a dog
walkable surfaces
representation 
learning
Figure 1. We address three problems: (1)Acting like a dog: where
the goal is to predict the future movements of the dog given a se-
quence of previously seen images. (2)Planning like a dog: where
the goal is to find a sequence of actions that move the dog between
the  locations  of  the  given  pair  of  images.   (3)Learning  from  a
dog: where we use the learned representation for a third task (e.g.,
walkable surface estimation).
tems.  In this paper, we take a direct approach to the prob-
lem  of  visual  intelligence.   Inspired  by  recent  work  that
explores the role of action and interaction in visual under-
standing  [56,  3,  31],  we  define  the  problem  of  visual  in-
telligence  asunderstanding  visual  data  to  the  extent  that
an agent can take actions and perform tasks in the visual
arXiv:1803.10827v2  [cs.CV]  17 May 2018
world.Under this definition, we propose to learn to act like
a visually intelligent agent in the visual world.
Learning to act like visually intelligent agents,  in gen-
eral, is an extremely challenging and a hard-to-define prob-
lem. Actions correspond to a wide range of movements with
complicated semantics.  In this paper, we take a small step
towards the problem of learning to directly act like intelli-
gent agents by considering actions in their most basic and
semantic-free form: simple movements.
We  choose  to  model  a  dog  as  the  visual  agent.   Dogs
have a much simpler action space than, say, a human, mak-
ing the task more tractable.  However, they clearly demon-
strate visual intelligence, recognizing food, obstacles, other
humans and animals, and reacting to those inputs. Yet their
goals  and  motivations  are  often  unknown  a  priori.   They
simply exist as sovereign entities in our world. Thus we are
modelling a black box where we only know the inputs and
outputs of the system.
In this paper, we study the problem of learning to act and
plan like a dog from visual input.  We compile the Dataset
of Ego-Centric Actions in a Dog Environment (DECADE),
which includes ego-centric videos of a dog with her corre-
sponding movements.  To record movements we mount In-
ertial Measurement Units (IMU) on the joints and the body
of the dog.  We record the absolute position and can calcu-
late the relative angle of the dog’s main limbs and body.
Using  DECADE,  we  explore  three  main  problems  in
this  paper  (Figure  1):  (1)  learning  to  act  like  a  dog;  (2)
learning to plan like a dog; and (3) using dogs movements
as supervisory signal for representation learning.
Inlearning to act like a dog,  we study the problem of
predicting the dog’s future moves, in terms of all the joint
movements, by observing what the dog has observed up to
the  current  time.   Inlearning  to  plan  like  a  dog,  we  ad-
dress the problem of estimating a sequence of movements
that take the state of the dog’s world from what is observed
at a given time to a desired observed state.  Inusing dogs
as supervision, we explore the potentials of using the dogs
movements for representation learning.
Our evaluations show interesting and promising results.
Our models can predict how the dog moves in various sce-
narios (act like a dog) and how she decides to move from
one state to another (plan like a dog). In addition, we show
that  the  representation  our  model  learns  on  dog  behavior
generalizes to other tasks.   In particular,  we see accuracy
improvements using our dog model as pretraining for walk-
able surface estimation and scene recognition.
2. Related Work
To the best of our knowledge there is little to no work
that directly models dog behavior.  We mention past work
that is most relevant.
Visual prediction.[51, 30] predict the motion of objects in
a static image using a large collection of videos.  [29] infer
the goals of people and their intended actions.   [35] infer
future activities from a stream of video.  [9] improve track-
ing by considering multiple hypotheses for future plans of
people.  [11] recognize partial events, which enables early
detection  of  events.   [14]  perform  activity  forecasting  by
integrating semantic scene understanding with optimal con-
trol theory.   [16] use object affordances to predict the fu-
ture activities of people. [49] localize functional objects by
predicting  people’s  intent.   [42]  propose  an  unsupervised
approach to predict possible motions and appearance of ob-
jects in the future.  [17] propose a hierarchical approach to
predict a set of actions that happen in the future.  [33] pro-
pose a method to generate the future frames of a video. [15]
predict the future paths of pedestrians from a vehicle cam-
era.  [36] predict future trajectories of a person in an ego-
centric setting. [22] predict the future trajectories of objects
according to Newtonian physics.  [41] predict visual repre-
sentations for future images. [52] forecast future frames by
learning a policy to reproduce natural video sequences. Our
work is different from these works since our goal is to pre-
dict the behavior of a dog and the movement of the joints
from an ego-centric camera that captures the viewpoint of
the dog.
Sequence to sequence models.Sequence  to  sequence
learning  [38]  has  been  used  for  different  applications  in
computer vision such as representation learning [37], video
captioning  [40,  50],  human  pose  estimation  [44],  motion
prediction  [20],   or  body  pose  labeling  and  forecasting
[8, 44].   Our model fits into this  paradigm since we map
the frames in a video to joint movements of the dog.
Ego-centric vision.Our  work  is  along  the  lines  of  ego-
centric  vision  (e.g.,  [7,  32,  18,  19])  since  we  study  the
dog’s behavior from the perspective of the dog.  However,
dogs have less complex actions compared to humans, which
makes the problem more manageable.  Prior work explores
future prediction in the context of ego-centric vision.  [55]
infer the temporal ordering of two snippets of ego-centric
videos and predict what will happen next. [26] predict plau-
sible future trajectories of ego-motion in ego-centric stereo
images. [13] estimates the 3D joint position of unseen body
joints using ego-centric videos.  [34] use online reinforce-
ment  learning  to  forecast  the  future  goals  of  the  person
wearing the camera.  In contrast, our work focuses on pre-
dicting future joint movements given a stream of video.
Ego-motion estimation.Our  planning  approach  shares
similarities with ego-motion learning.  [54] propose an un-
supervised  approach  for  camera  motion  estimation.   [45]
propose  a  method  based  on  combination  of  CNNs  and
RNNs to perform ego-motion estimation for cars. [21] learn
a network to estimate relative pose of two cameras.   [39]
also  train  a  CNN  to  learn  depth  map  and  motion  of  the
camera in two consecutive images.  In contrast to these ap-
proaches that estimate translation and rotation of the cam-
era, we predict a sequence of joint movements.  Note that
the joint movements are constrained by the structure of the
dog body so the predictions are constrained.
Action inference & Planning.Our  dog  planning  model
infers the action sequence for the dog given a pair of images
showing before and after action execution.   [3] also learn
the mapping between actions of a robot and changes in the
visual state for the task of pushing objects.  [27] optimize
for actions that capture the state changes in an exploration
setting.
Inverse Reinforcement Learning.Several  works  (e.g.,
[1, 4, 34]) have used Inverse Reinforcement Learning (IRL)
to infer the agent’s reward function from the observed be-
havior.  IRL is not directly applicable to our problem since
our action space is large and we do not have multiple train-
ing examples for each goal.
Self-supervision.Various research explores representation
learning by different self-supervisory signals such as ego-
motion [2, 12], spatial location [6], tracking in video [47],
colorization [53], physical robot interaction [31], inpainting
[28], sound [25], etc. As a side product, we show we learn a
useful representation using embeddings of joint movements
and visual signals.
3. Dataset
We  introduce  DECADE,  a  dataset  of  ego-centric  dog
video and joint movements. The dataset includes 380 video
clips from a camera mounted on the dog’s head.  It also in-
cludes corresponding information about body position and
movement.  Overall we have 24500 frames.  We use 21000
of them for training, 1500 for validation, and 2000 for test-
ing.   Train,  validation,  and  test  splits  consist  of  disjoint
video clips.
We use a GoPro camera on the dog’s head to capture the
ego-centric videos.  We sub-sample frames at the rate of 5
fps.  The camera applies video stabilization to the captured
stream. We use inertial measurement units (IMUs) to mea-
sure body position and movement. Four IMUs measure the
position of the dog’s limbs, one measures the tail, and one
measures the body position. The IMUs enable us to capture
the movements in terms of angular displacements.
For each frame, we have the absolute angular displace-
ment of the six IMUs.  Each angular displacement is repre-
sented as a4dimensional quaternion vector.  More details
about angular calculations in this domain and the method
for quantizing the data is explained in detail in Section 7.
The  absolute  angular  displacements  of  the  IMUs  depend
on  what  direction  the  dog  is  facing.   For  that  reason,  we
compute the difference between angular displacements of
the joints, also in the quaternion space.  The difference of
the angular displacements between two consecutive frames
(that is0.2sin time) represents the action of the dog in that
timestep.
An Arduino on the dog’s back connects to the IMUs and
records  the  positional  information.   It  also  collects  audio
data via a microphone mounted on the dog’s back. We syn-
chronize the GoPro with the IMU measurements using au-
dio information.   This allows us to synchronize the video
stream with the IMU readings with microsecond precision.
We collect the data in various outdoor and indoor scenes:
living room, stairs, balcony, street, and dog park are exam-
ples of these scenes.  The data is recorded in more than 50
different  locations.   We  recorded  the  behavior  of  the  dog
while involved in certain activities such as walking, follow-
ing, fetching, interaction with other dogs, and tracking ob-
jects. No annotations are provided for the video frames, we
use the raw data for our experiments.
4. Acting like a dog
We predict how the dog acts in the visual world in re-
sponse  to  various  situations.   Specifically,  we  model  the
future  actions  of  the  dog  given  a  sequence  of  previously
seen  images.    The  input  is  a  sequence  of  image  frames
(I
1
, I
2
, . . . , I
t
), and the output is the future actions (move-
ments)  of  each  jointjat  each  timestept  <  t
′
≤N:
(a
j
t+1
, a
j
t+2
, . . . , a
j
t+N
).   Timesteps  are  spaced  evenly  by
0.2sin time.   The actiona
j
t
is the movement of the joint
j, that along with the movements of other joints, takes us
from image frameI
t
toI
t+1
.  For instance,a
2
3
represents
the movement of the second joint that takes place between
image framesI
3
andI
4
.  Each action is the change in the
orientation of the joints in the 3D space.
We formulate the problem as classification, i.e. we quan-
tize joint angular movements and label each joint movement
as  a  ground-truth  action  class.   To  obtain  action  classes,
we cluster changes in IMU readings (joint angular move-
ments)  byK-means,  and  we  use  quaternion  angular  dis-
tances to represent angular distances between quaternions.
Each  cluster  centroid  represents  a  possible  movement  of
that joint.
Our movement prediction model is based on an encoder-
decoder architecture,  where the goal is to find a mapping
between input images and future actions.  For instance, if
the dog sees her owner with a bag of treats, there is a high
probability that the dog will sit and wait for a treat, or if the
dog sees her owner throwing a ball, the dog will likely track
the ball and run toward it.
Figure 2 shows our model. The encoder part of the model
consists  of  a  CNN  and  an  LSTM.  At  each  timestep,  the
CNN  receives  a  pair  of  consecutive  images  as  input  and
provides an embedding,  which is used as the input to the
LSTM. That is, the LSTM cell receives the features from
framestandt+ 1as the input in a timestep, and receives
framest+ 1andt+ 2in the next timestep.  Our experi-
mental results show that observing the two frames in each
LSTM
LSTM
LSTMLSTM
LSTMLSTM
ResNetResNet
ResNetResNet
ResNetResNet
FC
encoder
decoder
FC
Figure 2.Model architecture for acting.The model is an encoder-decoder style neural network. The encoder receives a stream of image
pairs, and the decoder outputs future actions for each joint. There is a fully connected layer (FC) between the encoder and decoder parts to
better capture the change in the domain (change from images to actions). In the decoder, the output probability of actions at each timestep
is passed to the next timestep. We share the weights between the two ResNet towers.
timestep of LSTM improves the performance of the model.
The CNN consists of two towers of ResNet-18 [10], one for
each frame, whose weights are shared.
The decoder’s goal is to predict the future joint move-
ments of the dog given the embedding of the input frames.
The decoder receives its initial hidden state and cell from
the encoder.  At each timestep, the decoder outputs the ac-
tion class for each of the joints.  The input to the decoder
at the first timestep is all zeros, at all other timesteps, we
feed in the prediction of the last timestep, embedded by a
linear transformer. Since we train the model with fixed out-
put length,  no stop token is  required and we always  stop
at a fixed number of steps.   Note that there are a total of
six joints; hence our model outputs six classes of actions at
each timestep.
Each image is given to the ResNet tower individually and
the features for the two images are concatenated. The com-
bined features are embedded into a smaller space by a linear
transformation. The embedded features are fed into the en-
coder LSTM. We use a ResNet pre-trained on ImageNet [5]
and we fine-tune it under a Siamese setting to estimate the
joints movements between two consecutive frames. We use
the fine-tuned ResNet in our encoder-decoder model.
We use an average of weighted class entropy losses, one
for each joint, to train our encoder-decoder.  Our loss func-
tion can be formulated as follows:
L(o, g) =
1
N K
N
∑
t=1
K
∑
i=1
1
f
i
g
i
logo(t)
i
g(t)
i
,(1)
whereg(t)
i
is  the  ground-truth  class  fori-th  joint  at
timestept,o(t)
i
g
i
is the predicted probability score forg
i
-th
class ofi-th joint at timestept,f
i
g
i
is the number of data
points whosei-th joint is labeled withg
i
,Kis the number
of joints, andNis the number of timesteps.  The
1
f
i
g
i
fac-
tor helps the ground-truth labels that are underrepresented
in the training data.
5. Planning like a dog
Another goal is to model how dogs plan actions to ac-
complish a task.  To achieve this, we design a task as fol-
lows: Given a pair of non-consecutive image frames, plan a
sequence of joint movements that the dog would take to get
from the first frame (starting state) to the second frame (end-
ing state).  Note that a traditional motion estimator would
not  work  here.   Motion  estimators  infer  a  translation  and
rotation for the camera that can take us from an image to
another; in contrast, here we expect the model to plan for
the actuator, with its set of feasible actions, to traverse from
one state to another.
More formally, the task can be defined as follows. Given
a  pair  of  images(I
1
, I
N
),  output  an  action  sequence  of
lengthN−1for each joint, that results in the movement
of the dog from the starting point, whereI
1
is observed, to
the end point, whereI
N
is observed.
Each action that the dog takes changes the states of the
world,  and  therefore  planning  for  the  next  steps.    Thus,
we design a recurrent neural network, containing an LSTM
that  observes  the  actions  taken  by  the  model  in  previous
timesteps for the next timestamp action prediction. Figure 3
shows the overview of our model.  We feed-forward image
framesI
1
andI
N
to individual ResNet-18 towers, concate-
nate the features from the last layer and feed it to the LSTM.
At each timestep, the LSTM cell outputs planned actions for
all six joints. We pass the planned actions for a timestep as
the input of the next timestep.  This enables the network to
plan the next movements conditioned on the previous ac-
LSTM
LSTM
LSTM
ResNet
ResNet
FC
!
"
!
#
FC
Figure 3.Model architecture for planning.The model is a com-
bination of CNNs and an LSTM. The inputs to the model are two
imagesI
1
andI
N
, which areN−1time steps apart in the video
sequence.   The LSTM receives the features from the CNNs and
outputs a sequence of actions (joint movements) that move the dog
fromI
1
toI
N
.
tions.  As opposed to making hard decisions about the pre-
viously taken actions, we pass the action probabilities as the
input to the LSTM in the next timestep.  A low probability
action at the current timestep might result in a high proba-
bility trajectory further along in the sequence. Using action
probabilities prevents early pruning to keep all possibilities
for the future actions.
We train this recurrent neural network using a weighted
cross entropy loss over all time steps and joints as described
in Equation 1.  Similar to theactingproblem, we use a dis-
cretized action space, which is obtained using the procedure
described in Section 7.
6. Learning from a dog.
While  learning  to  predict  the  movements  of  the  dog’s
joints from the images that the dog observes we obtain an
image representation that encodes different types of infor-
mation.   To  learn  a  representation,  we  train  a  ResNet-18
model to estimate the current dog movements (the change in
the IMUs from timet−1tot) by looking at the images that
the dog observes in timet−1andt. We then test this repre-
sentation, and compare with a ResNet-18 model trained on
ImageNet, in a different task using separate data.  For our
experiments we choose the task of walkable surface estima-
tion  [23]  and  scene  categorization  using  SUN397  dataset
[48].  Figure 4 depicts our model for estimating the walka-
ble surfaces from an image. To showcase the effects of our
representation, we replace the ResNet-18 part of the model
shown in blue with a ResNet trained on ImageNet and com-
pare it with a ResNet trained on DECADE.
7. Experiments
We evaluate our models on (1) how well they can predict
the  future  movements  of  the  dog  (acting),  (2)  how  accu-
rately they can plan like a dog, and (3) how well the repre-
sentation learned from dog data generalizes to other tasks.
ResNet
DeConv
DeConv
DeConv
+
+
+
Conv
Figure 4.Model architecture for walkable surface estimation.
We augment the last four layers of ResNet with Deconvolution and
Convolution layers to infer walkable surfaces.
7.1. Implementation details
We use inertial measurement units (IMUs) to obtain the
angular displacements of the dog’s joints.  The IMUs that
we use in this project process the angular displacements in-
ternally and provide the absolute orientation in quaternion
form at average rate of 20 readings per second. To synchro-
nize all IMUs together, we connect all the IMUs to the same
embedded system (Raspberry pi 3.0).  We use a GoPro on
the  dog’s  head  to  capture  ego-centric  video,  and  we  sub-
sample the images at a rate of 5 frames per second. To sync
the  GoPro  and  Raspberry  pi,  we  use  audio  that  has  been
recorded on both instruments.
The  rate  of  the  joint  movement  readings  and  video
frames  are  different.   We  perform  interpolation  and  aver-
aging to compute the absolute angular orientation for each
frame.  For each frame of the video, we compute the aver-
age of IMU readings, in quaternion space, corresponding to
a window of 0.1 second centered at the current frame.
To factor out the effects of global orientation change we
use the relative orientations rather than the absolute ones.
We compute the difference of absolute angular orientations
corresponding  to  consecutive  frames  after  calculating  the
average of quaternions for each frame. The reason for using
quaternions, instead of Euler angles, is that subtracting two
quaternions is more well-defined and is easily obtained by:
q
2
−q
1
=q
−1
1
q
2
We use K-means clustering to quantize the action space
ModelTest Accuracy
Nearest Neighbor13.14
CNN - regression12.73
Our Model – Single Tower18.65
Our Model20.69
Table 1. Inferring the action between two consecutive frames.
(space of relative joint movements).  The distance function
that we use for K-means clustering is defined by:
dist(q
1
, q
2
) = 2arccos(〈q
1
, q
2
〉)
The reason for formulating the problem as classification
rather than regression is that our experimental evaluations
showed that CNNs obtain better results for classification (as
opposed to regression to continuous values).  The same ob-
servation has been made by [43, 46, 24], where they also
formulate a continuous value estimation problem as classi-
fication.
We treat each joint separately during training. It is more
natural to consider all joints together for classification to re-
spect the kinematic constraints, however it should be noted
that:  (1)  It  is  hard  to  collect  enough  training  data  for  all
possible  joint  combinations  (3910  different  joint  configu-
rations appear in our training data); (2) By combining the
losses for all joints,  the model encodes an implicit model
of kinematic possibilities; (3) Our experiments showed that
per-joint clustering is better than all-joint clustering.
To visualize the dog movements we use a 3D model of a
dog from [57].  Their model is a 3D articulated model that
can represent animals, such as dogs.  For visualization, we
apply the movement estimates from the model to the dog
model.
Learning to Act.The  input  to  the  acting  network,  ex-
plained in Section 4, are pairs of frames of size224×224
and the output is a sequence of movements predicted for fu-
ture actions of the dog.  The input images are fed into two
ResNet-18 towers with shared weights.  The outputs of the
ResNets (the layer before the classification layer), which are
of size512, are concatenated into a vector of size1024. The
image vector is then used as the input to the encoder LSTM.
The encoder LSTM has a hidden size of512, and we set the
initial hidden and cell states to all zeros.
The hidden and cell state of the last LSTM cell of the
encoder are used as the initialization of the hidden and cell
state  of  the  LSTM  for  the  decoder  part.   There  is  a  fully
connected layer before the input to the decoder LSTM to
capture the domain change between the encoder and the de-
coder (encoder is in the image domain, while the decoder in
the joint movement domain).
The output of each decoder LSTM cell is then fed into
6 fully connected layers, where each one estimates the ac-
tion class for each joint.  We consider 8 classes of actions
for each joint.   We visualized our training data for differ-
ent number of clusters and observed that 8 clusters provide
a reasonable separation of clusters, does not result in false
clusters,  and clusters correspond to natural movements of
the limbs.
We pre-train the ResNets by fine-tuning them for the task
of estimating the joint actions, where we use a pair of con-
secutive frames as input and we have 6 different classifica-
tion layers corresponding to different joints.
Learning to Plan.For the planning network, the input is
obtained by concatenation of the ResNet-18 features for the
source and destination input images (a vector of size2048).
A  fully  connected  layer  receives  this  vector  as  input  and
converts it to a 512 dimensional vector, which is then used
as the first time step input for the LSTM. The LSTM output
is 48 dimensional (6 joints×8 action class). The output is
followed by a48×512fully connected layer. The output of
the fully connected layer is used as the input of the LSTM
at the next timestep.
Learning from a dog.To  obtain  the  representation,  we
train  a  ResNet-18  model  to  estimate  the  dog  movements
from timet−1to timetby looking at the images at time
t−1andt.  We use a simple Siamese network with two
ResNet-18 towers whose weights are shared.  We concate-
nate  the  features  of  both  frames  into  a1024-dimensional
vector and use a fully connected layer to predict the final
48labels (6IMUs each having8class of values).  Table 1
shows our results on how well this network can predict the
current (not future) movements of the dog.  The evaluation
metric is the class accuracy described below.  We use this
base network to obtain our image representation.  We also
use this network for initializing our acting and planning net-
works.
7.2. Evaluation metrics
We  use  different  evaluation  metrics  to  compare  our
method with the baselines.
Class Accuracy:This is the standard metric for classifica-
tion tasks.  We report the average per class accuracy rather
than the overall accuracy for two reasons:  1) The dataset
is not uniformly distributed among the clusters and we do
not want to favor larger clusters over smaller ones, and 2)
Unlike the overall unbalanced accuracy, the mean class ac-
curacy of a model that always predicts the mode class is not
higher than chance.
Perplexity:Perplexity  measures  the  likelihood  of  the
ground-truth  label.   Perplexity  is  commonly  used  for  se-
quence modeling.  We report perplexity for all of the base-
lines  and  models  that  are  probabilistic  and  predict  a  se-
quence.   If our model assigns probabilitypto a sequence
of lengthn, the perplexity measure is calculated asp
1
n
.
Figure 5.Qualitative Results: Learning to Act.Our model sees 5 frames of a video where a man begins throwing a ball past the dog. In
the video the ball bounces past the dog and the dog turns to the right to chase the ball.  Using just the first 5 frames our model correctly
predicts how the dog turns to the right as the ball flies past.
ModelTest AccuracyPerplexity
Nearest Neighbor12.64N/A
CNN19.840.2171
Our Model–1 tower18.040.2023
Our Model–1 frame/timestep19.280.242
Our Model21.620.2514
Table 2.Acting Results.We observe a video sequence of 5 frames
and predict the next 5 actions.
7.3. Results
Learning to act like a dog.Table 2 summarizes our exper-
imental results for predicting the future movements of the
dog using the images the dog observes.  We compare our
method with two baselines in terms of both test set accu-
racy and perplexity.  The Nearest Neighbors baseline uses
the features obtained from a ResNet18 network trained on
ImageNet.  The CNN baseline concatenates all the images
into an input tensor for a ResNet18 model that classifies the
future actions.  We also report two ablations of our model.
The 1 tower ablation uses the model depicted in Figure 2
but only uses one ResNet-18 tower with both frames con-
ModelTest AccuracyPerplexity
Nearest Neighbor14.09N/A
CNN14.610.1419
Our Model19.770.2362
Table 3.Planning Results.Planning between the start and end
frame. We consider start and end images that are 5 steps apart.
catenated (6channels) as the input.  We also compare our
model  with  an  ablation  that  only  uses  one  image  at  each
timestep instead of looking at two.  Our results show that
our  model  outperforms  the  baselines.   Our  ablations  also
show the importance of different components in our model.
Figure 5 shows an example where a man is throwing a ball
past the dog.  Our model correctly predicts the future dog
movements (the bottom row) by only observing the images
the dog observed in the previous time steps (the first row).
The second row shows the set of images the dog actually
observed.  These images were not shown to the algorithm
and are depicted here to better render the situation.
Learning to plan like a dog.Table 3 shows our experi-
mental results for the task of planning.  The nearest neigh-
ModelAngular metricAll joints
Random131.704e-4
CNN-acting63.428.67
Our model-acting59.619.49
CNN-planning76.180.14
Our model-planning63.143.66
Table 4. Continuous evaluation and all-joint evaluation.  Lower is
better in the first column. Higher is better in the second column.
bor baseline concatenates the image features obtained from
a ResNet-18 trained on ImageNet and searches for a plan of
the required size that corresponds to the closest feature. The
CNN baseline concatenates the input source and destination
images into an input tensor that feeds into a ResNet-18 that
predicts a plan for the required size.  Our results show that
our model outperforms these baselines in the challenging
task of planning like a dog both in terms of accuracy and
perplexity.
To better understand the behavior of the model, for both
acting and planning, we show the performance in terms of
a  continuous  angular  metric  and  also  for  all  joints  in  Ta-
ble 4.  The angular metric compares the mean of the pre-
dicted cluster with the actual continuous joint movements
in groundtruth (arccos(2(q
pred
.q
gt
)
2
−1)), whereq
pred
and
q
gt
are the predicted and groundtruth quaternion angles, re-
spectively. The all-joint metric calculates the percentage of
correct predictions, where we consider a prediction correct
if all joints are predicted (classified) correctly.
Learning from a dog.We test our hypothesis about the
information  encoded  in  our  representation  learned  from
mimicking dogs behaviour by comparing our representation
with a similar one trained for image classification on Ima-
geNet on a third task. We chose the task of walkable surface
estimation and scene classification.
1) Walkable surface estimation.The goal for this task
is to label pixels that correspond to walkable regions in an
image  (e.g.,  floor,  rug,  and  carpet  regions).   We  use  the
dataset  provided  by  [23].   In  our  dataset,  we  have  some
sequences  of  dog  walking  in  indoor  and  outdoor  scenes.
There are various types of obstacles (e.g., furniture, people,
or walls) in the scenes that the dog avoids.  We conjecture
that the learned representation for our network should pro-
vide strong cues for estimating walkable surfaces.
The definition of walkable surfaces for humans and dogs
is not the same. As an example, the area under the tables are
labeled as non-walkable for humans and walkable for dogs.
However, since our dog is large-size dog, the definition of
walkability is roughly the same for humans and the dog.
We trained ResNet-18 on ImageNet and then finetuned
it on the walkable surface dataset as our baseline.  We per-
formed the same procedure for using our features (trained
for theactingtask).   For finetuning both models,  we just
update the weights for the last convolutional layer (green
ModelPre-training taskIOU
ResNet-18ImageNet Classification42.88
ResNet-18Acting like a dog45.60
Table 5.Walkable surface estimation.We compare the result of
the network that is trained on ImageNet with the network that is
trained for ouractingtask. The evaluation metric is IOU.
block in Figure 4).
Table 5 shows the results.   Our features provide a sig-
nificant improvement,3%, over the ImageNet features. We
use IOU as the evaluation metric.   This indicates that our
features have some information orthogonal to the ImageNet
features.
2) Scene classification.We perform an additional scene
recognition  experiment  using  SUN  397  dataset  [48].   We
used the same 5-instance training protocol used by [2]. The
representation learned by us obtains the accuracy of 4.48
(as a point of reference [12] achieves 1.58 and [2] achieves
0.5-6.4 from their representations, and the chance is 0.251).
This is interesting since our dataset does not include many
of the scene types (gas station, store, etc).
8. Conclusion
We study the task of directly modeling a visually intel-
ligent agent.  Our model learns from ego-centric video and
movement information to act and plan like a dog would in
the same situation.  We see some success both in our quan-
titative and qualitative results.  Our experiments show that
our models can make predictions about future movements
of a dog and can plan movements similar to the dog.
This is a first step towards end-to-end modelling of in-
telligent agents.  This approach does not need manually la-
beled data or detailed semantic information about the task
or goals of the agent.  We can use this model on a wide va-
riety of agents and scenarios and learn useful information
despite the lack of semantic labels.
For this work, we limit ourselves to only considering vi-
sual data. However, intelligent agents use a variety of input
modalities when interacting with the world including sound,
touch, smell, etc. We are interested in expanding our models
to encompass more input modalities in a combined, end-to-
end model.  We also limit our work to modelling a single,
specific dog.   It would be interesting to collect data from
multiple dogs and evaluate generalization across dogs.  We
hope this work paves the way towards better understanding
of visual intelligence and of the other intelligent beings that
inhabit our world.
Acknowledgements:We would like to thank Carlo C. del Mundo
for his help with setting up the data collection system, Marc Mile-
stone for his help in data collection and miss Kelp M. Redmon
for  being  the  dog  in  our  data  collection.   This  work  is  in  part
supported by ONR N00014-13-1-0720, NSF IIS-1338054, NSF-
1652052, NRI-1637479, Allen Distinguished Investigator Award,
and the Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence.
References
[1]  P. Abbeel and A. Y. Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse
reinforcement learning. InICML, 2004. 3
[2]  P.  Agrawal,  J.  Carreira,  and  J.  Malik.   Learning  to  see  by
moving. InICCV, 2015. 3, 8
[3]  P.  Agrawal,  A.  Nair,  P.  Abbeel,  J.  Malik,  and  S.  Levine.
Learning to poke by poking:  Experiential learning of intu-
itive physics. InNIPS, 2016. 1, 3
[4]  C. L. Baker, R. Saxe, and J. B. Tenenbaum.  Action under-
standing as inverse planning.Cognition, 2009. 3
[5]  J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L. Li, K. Li, and F. Li.  Ima-
genet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.  InCVPR,
2009. 4
[6]  C. Doersch,  A. Gupta,  and A. A. Efros.   Unsupervised vi-
sual representation learning by context prediction.  InICCV,
2015. 3
[7]  A. Fathi, A. Farhadi, and J. M. Rehg.   Understanding ego-
centric activities. InICCV, 2011. 2
[8]  K. Fragkiadaki, S. Levine, P. Felsen, and J. Malik. Recurrent
network models for human dynamics. InICCV, 2015. 2
[9]  H. Gong, J. Sim, M. Likhachev, and J. Shi. Multi-hypothesis
motion planning for visual object tracking.  InICCV, 2011.
2
[10]  K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun. Deep residual learning
for image recognition. InCVPR, 2016. 4
[11]  M. Hoai and F. De la Torre.  Max-margin early event detec-
tors. InCVPR, 2012. 2
[12]  D. Jayaraman and K. Grauman.  Learning image representa-
tions tied to ego-motion. InICCV, 2015. 3, 8
[13]  H. Jiang and K. Grauman. Seeing invisible poses: Estimating
3d body pose from egocentric video. InCVPR, 2017. 2
[14]  K. M. Kitani, B. D. Ziebart, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert.
Activity forecasting. InECCV, 2012. 2
[15]  J.  F.  P.  Kooij,  N.  Schneider,  F.  Flohr,  and  D.  M.  Gavrila.
Context-based pedestrian path prediction. InECCV, 2014. 2
[16]  H. S. Koppula and A. Saxena. Anticipating human activities
using  object  affordances  for  reactive  robotic  response.   In
RSS, 2013. 2
[17]  T. Lan, T.-C. Chen, and S. Savarese.  A hierarchical repre-
sentation for future action prediction. InECCV, 2014. 2
[18]  Y. J. Lee, J. Ghosh, and K. Grauman. Discovering important
people and objects for egocentric video summarization.  In
CVPR, 2012. 2
[19]  C. Li and K. M. Kitani.  Pixel-level hand detection in ego-
centric videos. InCVPR, 2013. 2
[20]  J. Martinez, M. J. Black, and J. Romero.  On human motion
prediction using recurrent neural networks.  InCVPR, 2017.
2
[21]  I. Melekhov, J. Ylioinas, J. Kannala, and E. Rahtu.  Relative
camera pose estimation using convolutional neural networks.
InarXiv, 2017. 2
[22]  R.   Mottaghi,    H.   Bagherinezhad,    M.   Rastegari,    and
A. Farhadi.  Newtonian image understanding: Unfolding the
dynamics of objects in static images. InCVPR, 2016. 2
[23]  R. Mottaghi, H. Hajishirzi, and A. Farhadi.  A task-oriented
approach for cost-sensitive recognition. InCVPR, 2016. 5, 8
[24]  R. Mottaghi, M. Rastegari, A. Gupta, and A. Farhadi. “what
happens if...” learning to predict the effect of forces in im-
ages. InECCV, 2016. 6
[25]  A.  Owens,  P.  Isola,  J.  H.  McDermott,  A.  Torralba,  E.  H.
Adelson, and W. T. Freeman.  Visually indicated sounds.  In
CVPR, 2016. 3
[26]  H. S. Park, J. Hwang, Y. Niu, and J. Shi.  Egocentric future
localization. InCVPR, 2016. 2
[27]  D. Pathak, P. Agrawal, A. A. Efros, and T. Darrell. Curiosity-
driven exploration by self-supervised prediction.  InICML,
2017. 3
[28]  D. Pathak, P. Kr
 ̈
ahenb
 ̈
uhl, J. Donahue, T. Darrell, and A. A.
Efros.  Context encoders: Feature learning by inpainting.  In
CVPR, 2016. 3
[29]  M. Pei, Y. Jia, and S.-C. Zhu. Parsing video events with goal
inference and intent prediction. InICCV, 2011. 2
[30]  S. L. Pintea, J. C. van Gemert, and A. W. M. Smeulders. D
 ́
ej
`
a
vu: Motion prediction in static images. InECCV, 2014. 2
[31]  L. Pinto,  D. Gandhi,  Y. Han,  Y. Park,  and A. Gupta.   The
curious robot:  Learning visual representations via physical
interactions. InECCV, 2016. 1, 3
[32]  H. Pirsiavash and D. Ramanan.  Detecting activities of daily
living in first-person camera views. InCVPR, 2012. 2
[33]  M. Ranzato, A. Szlam, J. Bruna, M. Mathieu, R. Collobert,
and S. Chopra.  Video (language) modeling:  a baseline for
generative models of natural videos. InarXiv, 2014. 2
[34]  N. Rhinehart and K. Kitani.   First-person forecasting with
online inverse reinforcement learning. InICCV, 2017. 2, 3
[35]  M. S. Ryoo. Human activity prediction: Early recognition of
ongoing activities from streaming videos. InICCV, 2011. 2
[36]  K. K. Singh, K. Fatahalian, and A. A. Efros.  Krishnacam:
Using  a  longitudinal,  single-person,  egocentric  dataset  for
scene understanding tasks. InWACV, 2016. 2
[37]  N. Srivastava, E. Mansimov, and R. Salakhutdinov.   Unsu-
pervised learning of video representations using LSTMs.  In
ICML, 2015. 2
[38]  I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le. Sequence to sequence
learning with neural networks. InNIPS, 2014. 2
[39]  B.  Ummenhofer,  H.  Zhou,  J.  Uhrig,  N.  Mayer,  E.  Ilg,
A.  Dosovitskiy,  and  T.  Brox.   Demon:  Depth  and  motion
network for learning monocular stereo. InCVPR, 2017. 2
[40]  S. Venugopalan,  M. Rohrbach,  J. Donahue,  R. J. Mooney,
T. Darrell, and K. Saenko.  Sequence to sequence - video to
text. InICCV, 2015. 2
[41]  C. Vondrick,  H. Pirsiavash,  and A. Torralba.   Anticipating
visual representations with unlabeled video. InCVPR, 2016.
2
[42]  J.  Walker,  A.  Gupta,  and  M.  Hebert.   Patch  to  the  future:
Unsupervised visual prediction. InCVPR, 2014. 2
[43]  J. Walker, A. Gupta, and M. Hebert. Dense optical flow pre-
diction from a static image. InICCV, 2015. 6
[44]  J. Walker, K. Marino, A. Gupta, and M. Hebert.  The pose
knows:  Video  forecasting  by  generating  pose  futures.   In
ICCV, 2017. 2
[45]  S. Wang, R. Clark, H. Wen, and N. Trigoni.   Deepvo:  To-
wards end-to-end visual odometry with deep recurrent con-
volutional neural networks. InICRA, 2017. 2
[46]  X. Wang, D. F. Fouhey, and A. Gupta.  Designing deep net-
works for surface normal estimation. InCVPR, 2015. 6
[47]  X. Wang and A. Gupta. Unsupervised learning of visual rep-
resentations using videos. InICCV, 2015. 3
[48]  J. Xiao, J. Hays, K. A. Ehinger, A. Oliva, and A. Torralba.
SUN database: Large-scale scene recognition from abbey to
zoo. InCVPR, 2010. 5, 8
[49]  D. Xie, S. Todorovic, and S. Zhu.   Inferring ”dark matter”
and ”dark energy” from videos. InICCV, 2013. 2
[50]  L. Yao, A. Torabi, K. Cho, N. Ballas, C. J. Pal, H. Larochelle,
and A. C. Courville. Describing videos by exploiting tempo-
ral structure. InICCV, 2015. 2
[51]  J. Yuen and A. Torralba.  A data-driven approach for event
prediction. InECCV, 2010. 2
[52]  K. Zeng, W. B. Shen, D. Huang, M. Sun, and J. C. Niebles.
Visual  forecasting  by  imitating  dynamics  in  natural  se-
quences. InICCV, 2017. 2
[53]  R. Zhang, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros. Colorful image coloriza-
tion. InECCV, 2016. 3
[54]  T. Zhou,  M. Brown,  N. Snavely,  and D. G. Lowe.   Unsu-
pervised learning of depth and ego-motion from video.   In
CVPR, 2017. 2
[55]  Y. Zhou and T. L. Berg. Temporal perception and prediction
in ego-centric video. InICCV, 2015. 2
[56]  Y. Zhu, D. Gordon, E. Kolve, D. Fox, L. Fei-Fei, A. Gupta,
R. Mottaghi, and A. Farhadi. Visual semantic planning using
deep successor representations. InICCV, 2017. 1
[57]  S.  Zuffi,  A.  Kanazawa,  D.  Jacobs,  and  M.  J.  Black.    3D
menagerie: Modeling the 3D shape and pose of animals.  In
CVPR, 2017. 6