Haptic Information Feedback Given to Handles  
in Guide Dog Training 
Chonghoon Park
1
, Qirong Zhu
1
, Shinji Tanaka
2
, Yasutoshi Makino
1
, and Hiroyuki Shinoda
1 
1 
Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan 
2 
Japan Guide Dog Association, Kanagawa, Japan 
(Email: park, e.zhu, @hapis.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 yasutoshi_makino, hiroyuki_shinoda @k.u-tokyo.ac.jp) 
Abstract --- In guide dog training, trainers use haptic information transmitted through the handle 
of the harness worn by the guide dog to understand the dog's state. They then apply appropriate 
force to the handle to train the dog to make correct judgments. This tactile experience can only be 
felt between the dog and the trainer, making it challenging to communicate the amount of force 
applied to others quantitatively. To solve this problem, this study proposes a method for real-time 
visualization of the force exerted on the handle and quantification of the handle movement through 
image processing, which can be applied to actual guide dog training. 
Keywords: guide dogs, haptics, image processing 
1  INTRODUCTION 
This study proposes a method to visualize and utilize 
force  information  occurring  at  the  handle  part  of  the 
harness worn by guide dogs (hereafter referred to as the 
“handle”) to improve the efficiency of guide dog training. 
When  guide  dog  trainers  train  guide  dogs,  they 
comprehend  the  surrounding  situation  and  obstacles 
through visual and auditory senses, observe the behavior 
of the guide dog, and assess the dog's reactions obtained 
through the handle. They then comprehensively judge the 
situation  based  on all  these  factors.  Therefore,  the 
movement of the handle contains information exchanged 
between the trainer and the guide dog in both directions. 
Understanding this exchange of information is crucial in 
the utilization and training of guide dogs.  
When considering the training of guide dog trainers, 
this haptic information  is challenging to  observe  and 
understand from the outside when an experienced trainer 
tries to  teach  a  skill  to  a  novice  trainer,  making  it 
challenging to convey the appropriate amount of force and 
timing. Currently,  experienced  trainers  observe  the 
training process externally, estimate the degree of force 
based on the behavior of both the novice trainer and the 
guide  dog,  and  provide  guidance  accordingly. 
Alternatively, they may place their hand directly over the 
novice's hand on the handle to demonstrate the appropriate 
force to apply.  
Our goal is to solve this problem by realizing a system 
that measures the applied force and displays it in real-time 
on a PC screen to evaluate force and utilize it for skill 
transfer quantitatively. Previous research addressing the 
difficulty  of  transmitting  such  sensory  information 
includes  attempts  to  classify  and  quantify  guide  dog 
behavior using Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) [1]. 
Additionally,  Zhu  et  al.  have  proposed  a  system  that 
incorporates  sensors  into  the  handle  to  measure 
information  during  training  [2].  Zhu's  system  uses 
accelerometers,  force  sensors,  and  depth  cameras 
mounted on the handle to measure the handle's inclination 
and force simultaneously. We have previously developed 
a  prototype  system  based  on  Zhu's  work,  attaching 
wireless force sensors to the handle to provide real-time 
feedback  on troops  during  training.  This  allowed  for 
quantitative  analysis  of  training  and clarification  of 
trainers' requirements [3]. We confirmed that the rotation 
of the handle relative to the back and the direction of 
pushing and pulling are essential elements.  
In this study, we measured force through sensors and 
attached a 360-degree camera to the trainer's shoulder to 
estimate  the  dog's  body  orientation  from  the  captured 
images. As shown in Fig. 1, this allowed us to measure 
both the axial force on the handle and the relative angle to 
the dog's back. This approach confirmed the potential for 
application in a wider variety of scenarios in guide dog 
training that involve handle rotation.  
Fig.1  Example of force and angle information provided 
2  METHOD 
2.1  Device construction 
Figures  2  and  3  show  the configuration  of  the 
measurement  system  and its block  diagram.  The 
measurements  are  conducted  using  two devices:  force 
measurement  with  a  force  sensor  and  detection  of  the 
movements of the guide dog and handle based on 360-
degree camera (RICOH THETA Z1) video. 
We tapped the handle several times and synchronized 
the results from the force sensor with the recorded video 
footage, aligning the camera and the force sensor data. 
Fig.2  Configuration of system 
Fig.3  System block diagram 
2.2  Detect handle and guide the dog. 
In the training process, the movements of the guide dog 
and  the  handle  are  detected using  the  pose  estimation 
model of Yolo V8, one of the deep learning algorithms. 
Using  a  360-degree  camera  video  recorded  above  the 
trainer's shoulder, images in an equirectangular projection 
format are obtained. The area in the lower front where the 
dog is located is converted into perspective projection 
images of 416*416 pixels, and 760 images are extracted. 
These  images  are  labeled as  shown  in  Fig. 4,  and 
additional training is performed on a model pre-trained 
with the COCO dataset [4] to detect the movements of the 
guide dog and the trainer's handle.  
To  evaluate  the  accuracy  of  the  trained  model,  the 
difference between the predicted and the manually labeled 
key point coordinates was calculated for 48 test images 
that  were  not  used  in  the  training. Table  1  shows the 
average pixel difference between the key points' actual 
and estimated values, and Table 2 shows the detection 
failure percentage for the key points. 
Fig.4  Labeling example 
Table 1  Key Points Detection Accuracy 
subject 
Left 
leg 
Right 
leg 
Head Tail handle grip 
x[px] 3.2 3.0 2.9 11.2 1.6 2.0 
y[px] 4.2 4.6 3.4 3.4 7.8 2.4 
Table 2  Detection Failure Percentage 
subject 
Left 
leg 
Right 
leg 
Head Tail handle grip 
Failure 
[%] 
0 2.08 2.08 14.5 0 2.08 
2.3  Force Measurement  
Fig.5  Handle with sensors 
As shown in Fig. 5, we cut a commercially available 
guide  dog  harness  handle  for  force  measurement  and 
installed a 6-axis force sensor (Leptrino CFS018CA201U) 
in the middle.  
Fig.6  Support to protect force sensor 
In this setup, there was a risk of sensor damage if a load 
higher than the specified value was applied in the direction 
of rotation or bending of the handle axis. To prevent this, 
we attached metal support materials to the force sensor to 
reduce  twisting  and  bending,  thereby  limiting  the 
application of loads exceeding the specified value to the 
handle. 
3  CONCLUSION 
Fig.7  Force changes while walking  
Fig.8  Force changes during a sudden stop  
In this system, along with force measurement, we also 
conducted image-based handle movement measurements, 
confirming the potential for use in various scenarios.  
Figures 6 and 7 show some of the actual measurement 
results. In Fig. 6, during walking, pulling and pushing 
forces occur in rhythm with the human's walking cycle. 
Although  it  varies  depending  on  the  state  of  walking 
training, approximately 20N of force is applied. In Fig. 7, 
when stopping, the dog stops first, and the human catches 
up, so a stronger pushing force is measured. This was 
measured as a peak of over 30N in the force sensor output. 
In the demonstration, the harness was not attached to 
the dog. Instead, participants will wear the 360-degree 
camera and handle introduced in Section 2, allowing for 
the reproduction of real-time force feedback and handle 
detection.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported in part by 21H05301.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Z.  Cleghern,  E. Williams,  S.  Mealin,  M.  Foster,  T. 
Holder, A. Bozkurt, and D. L. Roberts: “An IoT and 
Analytics  Platform  for  Characterizing  Adolescent 
Dogs'  Suitability  for  Guide  Work,”  Conference  on 
Animal-Computer Interaction, No.1, pp. 1–6 (2019) 
[2] Q. Zhu, A. Wang, S. Tanaka, Y. Matsunami, Y. Makino, 
and  H.  Shinoda:  “Haptic  Recording  and  Display 
System  for  Guide  Dog,”  IEEE  World  Haptics 
Conference, (2023). 
[3] C. Park, Q. Zhu, S. Tanaka, Y. Matsunami, Y. Makino, 
and H. Shinoda: “Visualizing the Force Applied to the 
Handle in Guide Dog Training,” 40th SICE Sensing 
Forum, (2023).  
[4] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. 
Ramanan,  P.  Dollár,  and  C.  L.  Zitnick:  “Microsoft 
COCO:  Common  Objects  in  Context,”  European 
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 740-755 
(2014).