arXiv:1508.00442v1  [quant-ph]  3 Aug 2015
EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
Strategic report on current status, visions and goals for research in Europe
Steffen J. Glaser
1
, Ugo Boscain
2
, Tommaso Calarco
3
, Christiane P. Koch
4
, Walter K ̈ockenberger
5
, Ronnie Kosloff
6
,
Ilya Kuprov
7
, Burkhard Luy
8
, Sophie Schirmer
9
, Thomas Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen
1
, Dominique Sugny
10,11
, and Frank K.
Wilhelm
12
1
Department Chemie, TU-M ̈unchen (TUM), Lichtenbergstrasse 4, 85747 Garching, Germany
2
CNRS, CMAP Ecole Polytechnique, Palaiseau, France and TeamGECO, INRIA Saclay Ile-de-France
3
Institute for Complex Quantum Systems and Center for Integrated Quantum Science and Technology, University of Ulm,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, D-89069 Ulm, Germany
4
Theoretische Physik, Universit ̈at Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Str. 40, 24132 Kassel, Germany
5
Sir Peter Mansfield Magnetic Resonance Centre, University of Nottingham, University Park, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom
6
Institute of Chemistry the Fritz Haber Research Center for Molecular Dynamics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904,
Israel
7
School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, University Road, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
8
Institut f ̈ur Organische Chemie and Institut f ̈ur Biologische Grenzfl ̈achen, Karlsruher Institut f ̈ur Technologie (KIT), Fritz-
Haber-Weg 6, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
9
College of Science, Swansea University, Singleton Park, Swansea SA2 8PP, Wales, United Kingdom
10
Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire Carnot de Bourgogne-Franche Comt ́e (ICB), UMR 6303 CNRS-Universit ́e de Bourgogne,
9 Av. A. Savary, BP 47 870, F-21078 Dijon Cedex, France
11
Institute for Advanced Studies, Technische Universit ̈at M ̈unchen, Lichtenbergstrasse 2a, D-85748 Garching, Germany
12
Theoretische Physik, Saarland University, 66123 Saarbr ̈ucken, Germany
Received: August 4, 2015/ Revised version: date
Abstract.It is control that turns scientific knowledge into useful technology: in physics and engineering
it provides a systematic way for driving a system from a giveninitial state into a desired target state
with minimized expenditure of energy and resources – as famously applied in the Apollo programme. As
one of the cornerstones for enabling quantum technologies,optimal quantum control keeps evolving and
expanding into areas as diverse as quantum-enhanced sensing, manipulation of single spins, photons, or
atoms, optical spectroscopy, photochemistry, magnetic resonance (spectroscopy as well as medical imag-
ing), quantum information processing and quantum simulation. — Here state-of-the-art quantum control
techniques are reviewed and put into perspective by a consortium uniting expertise in optimal control the-
ory and applications to spectroscopy, imaging, quantum dynamics of closed and open systems. We address
key challenges and sketch a roadmap to future developments.
PACS.02.30.Yy Control theory in mathematical physics – 03.67.LxQuantum computation architectures
and implementations – 07.57.Pt Submillimeter wave, microwave and radiowave spectrometers; magnetic
resonance spectrometers, auxiliary equipment, and techniques – 82.53.Kp Coherent spectroscopy of atoms
and molecules
Contents
1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2  General aspects and mathematics of optimal control2
2.1  Controllability and simulability . . . . . . . . .3
2.2  Control design  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4
2.3  Quantum feedback control theory . . . . . . . .6
2.4  Long-term vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
3  Atomic, molecular, and chemical physics . . . . . . .7
3.1  State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7
3.2  Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges  . . .9
3.3  Long-term vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
4  Magnetic resonance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
4.1  State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
4.2  Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges  . . .12
4.3  Long-term vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
5  Quantum information and communication . . . . . .13
5.1  State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
5.2  Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges  . . .14
5.3  Long-term vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
6  Prospects for applications and commercial exploitation15
7  Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
2Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
Foreword
The authors of the present paper represent the QUAINT
consortium, a European Coordination Action on Optimal
Control  of  Quantum  Systems,  funded  by  the  European
Commission Framework Programme 7, Future Emerging
Technologies FET-OPEN programme and the Virtual Fa-
cility  for  Quantum  Control  (VF-QC).  This  consortium
unites expertise in optimal control theory and applications
to quantum systems both in existing and widely used areas
such as spectroscopy and imaging and in emerging quan-
tum technologies such as quantum information processing,
quantum communication, quantum simulation and quan-
tum  sensing.  Challenges  to  quantum  control  have  been
gathered by a broad poll of leading researchers across the
communities of general and mathematical control theory,
atomic, molecular, and chemical physics, electron and nu-
clear magnetic resonance spectroscopy as well as medical
imaging, quantum information, communication and sim-
ulation.  144  experts  of  these  fields  have  provided  feed-
back  and  specific  input  on  the  state  of  the  art,  as  well
as mid-term and long-term goals. These have been sum-
marized in this document, which can be viewed as a per-
spectives  paper, providing a  roadmap for  the  future  de-
velopment of quantum control. As such an endeavour can
hardly be complete and there are many additional areas of
quantum control applications, such as spintronics, nano-
optomechanical technologies etc., this roadmap is designed
as a living document that is available at at the homepage
of the VF-QC web page, [
1], where additional aspects as
well as new developments and ideas will be included.
1 Introduction
It is control that turns scientific knowledge into technol-
ogy.  The  general  goal  of  quantum  control  is  to  actively
manipulate dynamical processes at the atomic or molec-
ular scale, typically by means of external electromagnetic
fields or forces. The objective of quantum optimal control
is  to  devise  and  implement  shapes  of  pulses  of  external
fields or sequences of such pulses, that reach a given task
in a quantum system in the best way possible. Quantum
control builds on a variety of theoretical and technological
advances from the  fields  of mathematical  control theory
and  numerical  mathematics  to  better  electronic  devices
such as arbitary-waveform generators with  sub  nanosec-
ond time resolution or stronger magnetic fields.
The  challenge  to  manipulate  nature  at  the  quantum
level offers a huge potential for current and future applica-
tions. Quantum systems and processes cover a wide range
from atomic and molecular physics, chemistry, materials
(such as semiconductors, superconductors) to biosystems
and  medicine.  Useful  applications  range  from  magnetic
resonance imaging and spectroscopy and the precise con-
trol of chemical reactions to emerging second generation
quantum  technologies. Quantum  optimal  control  is  part
of  the  effort  to  engineer  quantum  technologies from  the
bottom up, and many striking examples of surprising and
non-intuitive - but extremely efficient and robust - quan-
tum  control  techniques  have  been  discovered  in  recent
years. Examples of important current applications are the
precise measurement of magnetic fields with nanometer-
scale  resolution  using  NV  centers  in  diamond,  state  en-
gineering  of  Bose-Einstein  condensates  and  high-fidelity
quantum  gates  in  superconducting  quantum  processors.
Similar to the first generation of quantum-based technol-
ogy  that  brought  forward  the  semiconductor  transistor,
the  laser, magnetic  resonance imaging  and  spectroscopy
in the last century, also the currently developing second
generation of quantum technology based on superposition,
entanglement  and  many  body  quantum  systems  are  ex-
pected to expand on the potential for new disruptive tech-
nologies  –  from  spintronic  devices,  quantum  metrology,
computing  technology,  to  elucidating  chemical  reaction
dynamics and material properties to biophysics. Quantum
control is a strategic cross-sectional field of research, en-
abling and leveraging current and future  quantum  tech-
nology application.
While the precise way to manipulate the behavior of
these systems may differ – from ultrafast laser control to
radio waves, the control, identification and system design
problems encountered share commonalities, while at the
same time being quite distinct from classical control prob-
lems. Advancing quantum control therefore requires bring-
ing together researchers from different application areas to
forge a community, create a common language and identify
common challenges. The further development of this field
of research offers many beneficial effects for today’s and to-
morrow’s society, related to health through faster, better,
safer diagnostics and treatment, secure communication in
a digital world, highly accurate navigation systems, more
efficient  and  clean  harvesting  of  solar  power,  the  search
for resources, efficient energy storage and transportation,
quantum machines and precision sensing and monitoring
of the environment [
54,91,340,377,404,442].
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is focussed
on mathematical optimal control theory, which is followed
by a description of the state of the art as well as mid-and
long-term perspectives of quantum control applications in
atomic, molecular, and chemical physics (section 3), mag-
netic resonance (section 4) and quantum information and
communication (section 5). Prospects for applications and
commercial exploitation are  outlined  (section  6)  and,  in
the end, conclusions are given (section 7).
2 General aspects and mathematics of
optimal control
The  recent advances of  quantum  control, by now  recog-
nized to be essential for the further development of quan-
tum technologies (see, e.g., [
100,109]) and reviewed in sec-
tions
3to5below, are based on powerful tools from math-
ematical control theory [
61,85,191,213,241,321,390]. As
often in the interplay of mathematics and physics, mathe-
matical concepts not only proved fruitful for the solution
of physics problems, but in turn specific physical features
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control3
required  further  mathematical  development.  In  the  con-
text of quantum control, these are for example entangle-
ment and the nature of quantum measurements. Eventu-
ally, a new research domain,mathematical quantum con-
trol theory[
7,40,54,83,91,106,447] has emerged.
In  general,  quantum  control  theory  needs  to  answer
two  fundamental  questions,  that  of  controllability,  i.e.,
what  control  targets  are  accessible,  cf.  section
2.1,  and
that of control design, i.e. how can a target be reached.
Approaches for control design can be open-loop or closed-
loop.  In  the  latter  case,  the  specific  nature  of  quantum
measurements needs to be taken into account. This is cov-
ered in section
2.3whereas the remaining control design
approaches are reviewed in section
2.2.  Open loop tech-
niques include approaches based on the Pontryagin max-
imum principle [321], i.e., quantum optimal control, with
solutions obtained analytically (section
2.2.1) or numeri-
cally (section
2.2.2). Optimal control does not make any
assumptions on the quantum system and also experimen-
tal constraints and robustness requirements can be fully
taken into account, i.e. it is generally applicable. However
in some cases, adiabatic control and its variants (cf. sec-
tion
2.2.3) can provide a more straight-forward approach
to consider robustness issues and constraints.
2.1 Controllability and simulability
2.1.1 State of the art
Controllability  analysis  determines  whether  a  quantum
system  can  be  brought  from  any  given  initial  state  to
any desired target state, or, more generally, from a given
set  of  initial  states  to  any  set  of  target  states.  Adapt-
ing results from classical linear control systems [
191,390]
to  bilinear  systems  with  a  non-switchable  drift  term,  a
rigorous Lie-framework was developed for closed systems
[
56,57,119,188,189,402]. Based on this work, for quan-
tum systems with finite dimension, controllability by now
is well understood [
5,91,101,231]
1
. Different notions of
controllability have been introduced for pure states, mixed
states, and evolution operator dynamics [362]. The main
controllability  test  is  based  on  the  rank  of  the  dynami-
cal Lie  algebra, which  is  generated by  the  drift  and  the
different control Hamiltonians. The difficulty of using the
rank condition in large systems has motivated a geometric
approach based on graph theory [
8], yielding eventually a
complete set of symmetry criteria for controllability [
463].
In infinite-dimensional systems, the mathematics is much
more  intricate  and  the  few  existing  results  are  confined
to quantum systems with a discrete spectrum. A first re-
sult is a general obstruction property to exact controlla-
bility  [
279,419]. This  was recently amended by  positive
results about exact [
27,28] and approximate controllabil-
ity [
76], based on Galerkin techniques. For the specific case
of a generalized Jaynes-Cummings model, i.e., several two-
level systems coupled to a harmonic oscillator, symmetry
methods were used to assess controllability [
200].
1
Note that only the standard bilinear situation (as in the
Schr ̈odinger equation) is discussed here.
Simultaneous  controllability  concerns  the  control  of
a  continuum  of  finite  dimensional  quantum  systems  by
only  a  few  control  fields.  This  is  also  known  as  ensem-
ble  controllability.  Approximate  and  exact  controllabil-
ity  results  have  been  obtained  recently  in  this  direction
[
28,249,251].  This  analysis  is  important  for  designing
control fields which are robust to experimental imperfec-
tions [144,216,218,219,379,420].
In addition to experimental imperfections and fluctu-
ations, decoherence may pose an obstacle to control. For
open  quantum  systems,  the  control  field  usually  cannot
fully compensate dissipation, as rigorously shown for the
case of Markovian dynamics [
9]. These results for Marko-
vian  dynamics  were  recently  generalized  to  a  complete
Lie semi-group picture [
102,300]. In contrast, controlla-
bility of systems with non-Markovian dynamics presents
by and large uncharted territory [333]. Reachability is ex-
pected to be larger for non-Markovian dynamics since non-
Markovianity implies information back-flow from the en-
vironment to the system [
53]. Indeed, an explorative study
showed non-Markovian map synthesis to be stronger than
its  restriction  to  the  Markovian  case  (as  anticipated  in
Ref. [
257]). In contrast, and surprisingly so, for the sim-
pler problem of state transfer under swichable Markovian
noise this is not the case [
30].
Finally, even if a system (A) is not fully controllable, its
controlled dynamics may still suffice to generate a desired
effective evolution as brought about by another quantum
dynamical  system  (B).  This  is  the  paradigm  of  finite-
dimensional quantum simulation. Adapting the tools from
controllability analysis, one readily sees that system A can
simulate system B if the system algebra of A encompasses
that  of  system  B.  A  recent  generalisation  of  the  results
in Ref. [
463] provides a complete set of symmetry criteria
together with an algorithm in order to decide simulability
on  system-algebraic  grounds  [
467].  Resorting  to  exactly
solvable problems may help this case [
64].
2.1.2 Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges
The major challenge is to better understand controllability
in open quantum systems. For  infinite-dimensional open
systems with a discrete spectrum which undergo Marko-
vian evolution, a rigorous understanding is non-trivial but
may be pursued by extending the standard Lie-Galerkin
techniques to non-unitary evolution. With the final goal of
identifying sufficient conditions for  approximate control-
lability of open systems analogous to closed systems [
76],
a mid-term perspective is to perform a sound regularity
analysis of a well-posed and defined mathematical control
problem.
No rigorous controllability analysis so far has tackled
open quantum systems which undergo non-Markovian dy-
namics. From a control point of view, non-Markovianity
may  be  connected  to  beneficial  aspects  of  the  system-
environment interaction, whereas the detrimental part is
linked to those Markovian dynamics that cannot be reme-
died – an aspect important not only for controllability but
4Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
also for dissipative state engineering and quantum memo-
ries. Along similar lines, projective measurements may en-
tail Zeno-type dynamics exploring directions that do not
show up in the unobserved system [
63].
Even for  closed quantum systems, several highly rel-
evant  questions  are  still  open.  These  include  the  exact
or  approximate  controllability  of  the  Schr ̈odinger  equa-
tion with mixed or continuous spectrum. This question is
important since it covers dissociation and ionization pro-
cesses,  the  control  of  which  is  a  major  goal  in  chemical
physics, cf. section
3.
Beyond controllability, a precise description of the reach-
able set (in the open case) and upper bounds on minimal
time  to  reach  target states  are largely unknown.  Also  a
universal estimate time to control finite-dimensional quan-
tum systems (with necessary drift) is still an open chal-
lenge.
2.2 Control design
2.2.1 Geometric optimal control—state of the art
Optimal control theory can be viewed as a generalization
of the calculus of variations for problems with dynamical
constraints.  Its  modern  version  was  born  with  Pontrya-
gin’s Maximum Principle in the late 1950’s [
321]. Its de-
velopment was boosted by using Kalman filters [
191,192]
in the Apollo programme and it is now a key tool in many
applications including quantum mechanics.
Solving  an  optimal  control  problem  means  finding  a
control  law,  i.e.,  a  pulse  sequence,  such  that  the  corre-
sponding  trajectory  satisfies  given  boundary  conditions
and  equation  of  motion  and  minimizes  a  cost  criterion
such  as  the  energy  or  duration  of  the  control.  Pontrya-
gin’s Maximum  Principle can be  formulated in  terms of
classical Hamiltonian equations. Usually, first one obtains
extremal trajectories, i.e., controls, by solving these equa-
tions.  Secondly,  one  selects  among  the  extremals  those
which  minimize  the  cost.  Although  looking  straightfor-
ward,  the  practical  use  of  Pontryagin’s Maximum  Prin-
ciple is far from trivial and control problems require ge-
ometric  analysis  and  numerical  methods.  The  latter  are
described below in section
2.2.2.
If  the  system  is  sufficiently  simple,  for  example  low-
dimensional, the optimal control problem may be solved
analytically. Typically, this requires a geometric analysis
of  the  control  problem  from  which  one  can  deduce  the
structure  of  the  optimal  solution,  a  proof  of  global  op-
timality, and physical limits such as the minimal time to
reach the target [
241]. Mathematical tools that were devel-
oped recently [
4,34,44,188] allowed to solve problems of
increasing difficulty  including fundamental control prob-
lems for closed [
42,43,91,92,135,209] and open quantum
systems [
35,205,238,291,400,461]. This method is able
to treat quantum control problems ranging from two and
three level quantum systems, two and three coupled spins
to two-level dissipative quantum systems whose dynamics
is governed by the Lindblad equation.
Extending methods of geometric control to infinite di-
mensions [
76] was unexpectedly successful. Also, the Car-
tan decomposition method  turned  out to  be  an  efficient
tool  for  the  control  of  spin  systems  [
201,208].  This  de-
composition  leads  to  a  drastic  reduction  of  the  dimen-
sionality of the quantum system, and may enable its geo-
metric description. A relatively little explored way to de-
rive  analytic  control  fields  is  singular  optimal  arcs  [
34].
This method has been applied to some exemplary quan-
tum systems [
206,238,338,450,456,457,458], but many
aspects remain to  explored. In  particular, this  approach
could be  interesting to  derive analytical optimal  control
fields.  These  methods  can  also  be  advantageously  com-
bined with numerical optimization techniques in order to
manipulate more complicated quantum systems [
240].
2.2.2 Numerical optimal control—state of the art
If  the  set  of  control  equations,  resulting  from  the  max-
imum  principle,  cannot  be  solved  analytically,  numeri-
cal optimal  control theory provides a  viable  alternative.
Algorithms comprise (i) gradient ascent algorithms [
210]
(which can be extended to second-order quasi-Newton and
Newton methods [
79,98,264]) and (ii) Krotov-type meth-
ods [
226,266,332],  also permitting  this extension [118].
The main difference between these two approaches is that
the control is updated (or replaced) for all times simulta-
neously in case (i) and sequentially in case (ii) which im-
plies different convergence properties. The algorithms are
comparatively easy to use and several program packages
include  optimal  control  modules,  i.e.,  SIMPSON  [
415],
SPINACH [
169], DYNAMO [264], and QuTiP [184]. Mod-
ifications  to  account  for  experimental  imperfections  and
limitations and to ensure robustness of the solution have
been  introduced  [
167,180,218,237,283,335,383,391,
438,445], and numerical optimal control theory has been
extended to open quantum systems [
22,128,145,190,365,
368].
It is also possible to restrict the control solution to a
predefined analytical form. In this case, the control only
depends on a limited set of free parameters which are op-
timized [
265,276,380]. Applications of numerical optimal
control are discussed below in sections
3to5but by now
have grown too numerous for a complete bibliography.
A  caveat  of  numerical  algorithms  which  are  derived
from the maximum principle is that they require to solve
the  system’s  equations  of  motion  many  times,  at  least
twice per iteration step. This potentially hampers appli-
cation to high-dimensional quantum systems. So far, three
approaches have been pursued to cope with this issue. (i)
Optimization  of  the  state  space  representation:  For  the
high-temperature regime of ensemble NMR spectroscopy,
the SPINACH package [
169] uses state propagation with
interactions  limited  to  pertinent  short-range  ones  (thus
leading to efficient truncation of the underlying spin Lie al-
gebra) for simulating unprecedentedly large spins systems
such as entire biomolecules [
355] with striking precision.
(ii) Gradient-free optimization: For many-body quantum
systems, the chopped random basis (CRAB) method uses
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control5
a parametrization of the control and interfaces the tensor
compression of the time-dependent density matrix renor-
malization group with  parameter optimization [
69,107].
The number of propagations may be significantly reduced
compared to gradient-based optimization, provided a small
basis is sufficient to represent the control. (iii) Local con-
trol  theory:  It  determines  the  control  field  from  instan-
taneous dynamical properties of the system by requiring
monotonic  increase  or  decrease  of  a  performance  index
[
121,398].  Under  well-established  conditions  [439],  the
system converges asymptotically towards the target. Lo-
cal controls are reminiscent of the closed-loop Lyapunov
method in stabilization; and correspondingly the approach
has also been termed tracking. Due to the inherent nature
of the quantum measurement process, this approach has
been  transformed  into  an  open-loop  control  law  in  the
quantum world. In this approach, the equation of motion
needs to be solved only once.
Mathematical quantum optimal control theory shows
how to design optimal control fields and describes under
which conditions they exist [
5,312]. It does, however, not
investigate  the  complexity  inherent  to  the  search  [
256].
The search complexity is related to the description of the
control landscape which specifies the control objective as
a function of the control variables. Different results on the
structure of the control landscape have been established
recently [75,97,310,327]. One of the main claims has been
that, provided there are no constraints on the control, the
control landscape does not contain local traps in all con-
trollable closed and some specific open quantum systems
[
54]. This proof has recently been contested and is still the
object of a vivid debate [
310,311,327]. Once constraints
are present, such as finite control field amplitude, this may
induce traps in the control landscape [
343,410]. Whether
and how imposing robustness of the control influences the
control landscape is an open question.
2.2.3 Control via adiabatic dynamics—state of the art
While optimal control theory is a general approach that
is particularly well suited for identifying fast controls, the
target  can  also  be  tackled  by  adiabatic  techniques  [
31,
158,409,435].  The  most  widely  known  among  these  is
Stimulated Raman Adiabatic Passage (STIRAP)[
31]. Adi-
abatic  techniques  usually  employ  a  sequence  of  very in-
tense  pulses  over  a  comparatively  long  timescale  which
enforces adiabatic following of the system dynamics. The
pulses can be frequency chirped according to the structure
of the energy levels. Such processes are inherently robust
to small variations of laser or system parameters and thus
well-suited to open-loop control. A main drawback of adi-
abatic control is the total time and energy, requirements
which cannot always be met in an experiment.
To address this issue, shortcuts to adiabaticity were de-
veloped [
413]. This approach can be viewed as an inverse
engineering  technique  based  on  Lewis-Riesenfeld  invari-
ants. It has been applied to a variety of quantum systems
[
20,77,90,347] for which such an invariant exists. Even
for an ensemble of quantum systems, analytical solutions
based on this technique are not out of reach [
90]. Similarly
to enforcing robustness in ensemble optimization using op-
timal control [
144,218], the basic idea consists in selecting
among a family of (exact) solutions the ones that are ef-
fectively robust to some extent to variations of the system
parameters.
2.2.4 Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges for control
design
As  with  controllability analysis,  the  major  challenge for
control  design  is  posed  by  open  quantum  systems  since
most systems of interest interact with their environment to
a non-negligible extent. An important challenge is the ex-
tension of the standard adiabatic and shortcut techniques
to open  quantum systems. Beyond some preliminary re-
sults [
186,354], there are many open questions, for exam-
ple, how to generalize Lewis-Riesenfeld invariants to open
system dynamics.
All open-loop control approaches discussed above as-
sume sufficient knowledge of the quantum system. Corre-
spondingly, for open quantum systems, system identifica-
tion needs to include dissipative parameters. A first step
to combine quantum control with implicit learning about
the system parameters is the ADHOC technique [
112].
Decoherence  in  open  quantum  systems  can  also  be
used as a resource in what has become known as dissipa-
tive state engineering [
62,225,364,428]. Optimal control
theory allows for tackling dissipative state engineering for
quantum systems that are too complex for manual design
of the driven-dissipative dynamics. This naturally includes
incorporation of the noise as additional optimization pa-
rameter [
30,309]. When added to coherent controls, time-
dependent Markovian noise (amplitude-damping) enables
the control system to transform any initial into any desired
target state [
30]. It can be easily integrated in toolboxes
like DYNAMO [
264], yet the implementation in realistic
settings remains unexplored.
On an algorithmic level, the basics of numerical quan-
tum optimal control are well established for both Marko-
vian  and  non-Markovian open  system  evolutions, as  de-
scribed  above.  The  main  challenge  there  is  the  efficient
numerical modeling of increasingly complex dynamics. A
promising route is provided by stochastic methods which
only require propagation of (several) pure states to unravel
the true dynamics [
46,306,365]. These methods are ap-
plicable to both systems interacting with an environment
or subjected to measurements that can be modelled by a
stochastic process. An open question in this context is to
find the most efficient way to control these systems such
that the  control is robust with  respect to the  stochastic
parameter [
14].
In view of numerical optimal control theory as an open-
loop technique, integration with application is a crucial is-
sue that has only very partially been addressed. In order to
make the theory more useful for specific experiments, the
gap between theory and experiments needs to be bridged.
In spite of recent progress, a systematic and efficient algo-
rithm addressing this issue is still lacking. One option con-
6Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
sists in combining open-loop optimal algorithms to closed-
loop control techniques in order to reduce their respective
drawbacks  [
112].  Using  these  two  tools  cooperatively  is
expected  to provide flexible  quantum control. A  current
challenge is still to improve the computational speed and
accuracy of the algorithms. A promising approach to this
end is the combined use of numerical and geometric op-
timal  control methods [
240]. Analogously to open  quan-
tum systems, improving the computational speed will be
an  important  prerequisite  to  attack  control  problems  of
increasing complexity, representing experimental settings
in  a  realistic  way.  Eventually,  the  goal  is  to  enable  the
problem-adapted design of controls in time-critical appli-
cations.
In view of a better understanding of control complex-
ity, a rigorous understanding of two crucial issues needs
to be developed – interrelation between minimum control
dimension and (effective) system dimension [
256,265] and
the questions of traps in the quantum control landscape.
Even  if  many  quantum  control problems  have  no  traps,
i.e.,  their  control landscapes  are  well-suited  to  the  local
numerical optimization approaches discussed above, this
is not always the case. One then needs to resort to global
optimization techniques which are numerically expensive
and generally do not perform very well. Whether and how
global  optimization  methods  such  as  dynamic  program-
ming may be (better) adapted to quantum control is also
an open question. The efforts to solve more complicated
control problems via geometric optimal control techniques
must continue with a special emphasis on open quantum
systems and on non-linear dynamics [
465].
Another  fundamental  open  question  is  whether  it  is
possible to connect the Lewis-Riesenfeld invariants, used
for the shortcuts to adiabaticity, with the formal frame-
work  of  the  Pontryagin  Maximum  Principle  of  optimal
control theory. This would hold the promise of combining
the best of two worlds.
2.3 Quantum feedback control theory
2.3.1 State of the art
In contrast to the open-loop techniques discussed in sec-
tion
2.2, closed-loop strategies [106] are capable of coping
with unpredictable disturbances. This approach is widely
used  in  classical control  theory,  where  information  from
the  state  of  the  system  is  fed  back  to  the  controller  to
correct  the  field  in  action.  However  the  perturbing  ef-
fect  of  quantum  measurements precludes  direct  applica-
tion of classical concepts. It required development of new
techniques tailored to quantum dynamics [
104,447]. An
indirect application is found in experimental closed-loop
quantum control, where each cycle of the loop is realized
experimentally, including preparation of a new sample in
each cycle [
187]. Different learning algorithms, such as ge-
netic algorithms, have been developed to design the new
control field after each iteration [
54].
Controlling a quantum system by feedback in a closed
loop  can  be  realized  in  two  different  ways  [
453]  –  using
the  measurement-based  feedback  approach  [
446]  or  the
coherent  feedback  method  [
258].  As  in  classical  control
theory, the first option is based on a measurement process
and  real-time  manipulation  of  the  system  depending  on
the  measurement result.  The  measurement feedback ap-
proach built on quantum filtering techniques [
46] is nowa-
days  mathematically  well  described  [
47,447].  Quantum
filtering  consists  in  generating  an  estimate  of  the  state
of  the  system  from  the  measurements  performed  on  it.
Measurement-based feedback has been  shown to  be  effi-
cient  [
81,82],  making real-time control of  quantum  sys-
tems experimentally feasible [
212,356].
In the second option, no measurement is used and the
quantum system is directly connected to a quantum con-
troller. The experimental feasibility of coherent feedback
control  has  recently  led  to  impressive  results  [
149,173,
178,262].
2.3.2 Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges
It is the specific quantum nature of systems that in gen-
eral makes them susceptible to measurement backaction.
Thus in the quantum domain, finding an experiment-class
adapted balance between open-loop control techniques and
closed-loop feedback counterparts is one of the major chal-
lenges. Moreover, since measurement-based feedback is re-
stricted to the processing time of the classical components,
which  have  the  slowest  time  scale,  exploiting  the  limits
of  coherent  feedback  control  is  useful  in  view  of  future
technologies. An advantage of coherent feedback over its
measurement-based counterpart is the reduced noise pro-
duced by the control process since there is no disturbance
from  a  system  measurement.  Feedback  control  methods
promise particular robustness and flexibility, but some im-
portant  questions  related  to  the  quantum  nature  of  the
dynamics remains to be solved. In particular, there is not
a  general  theory  showing  that  quantum  controllers  per-
form better than their classical counterparts, and if so, in
which cases and under which experimental conditions.
Many other questions are still open in quantum feed-
back  control.  They  extend  from  a  general  theory  about
the role of weak measurements in the control of quantum
systems to feedback control of  non-Markovian dynamics
and the influence of model uncertainties on the feedback
control. Similarly, another interesting perspective is to ex-
plore whether programmable quantum processors [
65,166]
themselves could be used or programmed such as to steer
quantum systems.
Most  of  the  developments  of  quantum  feedback con-
trol  have  been  made  in  the  context  of  quantum  optics
[
336,356,446,447]. Recent technological progresses have
enabled advances in superconducting circuits both theo-
retically [
269]  and  experimentally [342,433].  A  problem
which is starting to attract attention is feedback control
in quantum transport [120]. In other words, the question
is to understand how the current quantum control tech-
niques developed for quantum optical systems can be ap-
plied  to  hybrid  systems  involving  quantum  dots,  super-
conducting  qubits  and  opto-mechanical  resonators.  The
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control7
existing  quantum  feedback  theory  has  to  be  adapted  to
these new dynamics.
2.4 Long-term vision
Quantum  optimal  control  theory  has  reached  a  level  of
maturity  that  enables  tackling  the  question  of  quantum
control  in  a  world  which  is  never  fully  quantum,  be  it
due  to  residual  couplings  to  the  environment  or  due  to
imperfections in the controls or system characterization.
The  ultimate  goal  is  to  develop  a  rigorous  understand-
ing of the fundamental limits as well as the opportunities
for  quantum  control  under  real-life  conditions,  in  terms
of  both  controllability and  control design.  This  includes
in particular control of quantum systems undergoing non-
Markovian evolution, as found in condensed phase physics
and chemistry. It will most likely require a combination of
the techniques described above and a synergy of efforts,
ranging from pure mathematics via algorithm design all
the  way  to  developing  techniques  for  integrating  theory
and experiment. Meeting these challenges would provide
the mathematical and algorithmic underpinnings for the
application  of  quantum  control  in  all  of  the  three  fields
described in the following.
3 Atomic, molecular, and chemical physics
3.1 State of the art
Within the realm of atomic, molecular and chemical physics,
quantum control was first discussed in the context of chem-
ical reactions. It was termed ’coherent control’ at the time
and conceived as a method to determine the fate of a re-
action using laser fields [
224,405,406]. The basic idea was
to employ interference of matter waves to enhance the de-
sired outcome and suppress all others [58,341]. A way to
create  the  desired  matter  wave interference  is  by  tailor-
ing laser fields [
224,405,406]. A reaction is viewed as the
following sequence of events—approach of the reactants;
formation of a new chemical bond; intermediate dynamics
of the generated molecular complex; stabilization into the
target  products,  typically  involving  the  breaking  of  an-
other chemical bond. Each of these steps can in principle
be controlled.
The  advent  of  femtosecond  lasers  and  pulse  shaping
technology [
280,444] in the 1990s allowed for experimen-
tally testing the idea of controlling chemical reactions. In
the  lab,  the  laser  pulse  shape  can  most  easily  be  deter-
mined  in  feedback  loops  combined  with  e.g.  genetic  al-
gorithms [
187]. Very soon after the theoretical proposals
several pioneering experimental papers were published de-
scribing control of unimolecular dissociation or fragmen-
tation, see Refs. [
55,93,94,147,228,244,297,326,448]
and references therein. Yet much still remains to be under-
stood about the mechanisms and even whether quantum
coherence is involved [
59].
Control strategies include both weak- and strong-field
scenarios. In the first case, a wavepacket is launched, and
its ensuing (ro-)vibrational dynamics is exploited. In the
strong-field regime, the laser pulse coherently controls the
dynamics  during  the  pulse  while  utilizing  the  effective
modification  of  the  energy  levels  of  atoms  [
24,25,416,
417]  or,  respectively,  the  potential  energy  landscape  ex-
perienced  by  the  molecules,  via  the  dynamic  Stark  ef-
fect [
26,401,422].
Weak field control of non-resonant excitation may em-
ploy optical interferences to control e.g. the population in
a final state [278]. Weak field here implies low order per-
turbation theory to be applicable. It was proven early in
the development of quantum control, that for weak fields
in an isolated quantum system, phase-only control is im-
possible for an objective which commutes with the free, or
drift, Hamiltonian [
60]. A qualitative explanation is that
under  such conditions  there  are no  interfering pathways
leading from the initial to the final stationary states. Ex-
perimental evidence has challenged this assertion, claim-
ing demonstration of weak-field phase-only control for an
excited state branching ratio [
325]. The phenomena were
attributed  to  the  influence  of  the  environment.  A  sub-
sequent study showed that such controllability is solvent
dependent [
425]. A theoretical demonstration that phase-
only control is possible in weak field for an open quantum
system soon followed [194]. It is still an open question if
weak-field phase-only control is possible for targets that
commute with the Hamiltonian in open quantum systems.
For example, can population transfer from a ground to the
excited surface be phase-controlled for a dye molecule in
solution? While  this  has theoretically been  shown to  be
impossible if  the time  evolution is  Markovian [
10],  most
solvents lead to non-Markovian system dynamics.
In  the  context  of  coherent  control  of  a  chemical  re-
action, the  bimolecular  process of  bond  formation using
femtosecond lasers remained much more elusive [
11,157,
221,270,277,298,349,353] than bond breaking. Its coher-
ent control was demonstrated only very recently [
243]. Full
control of a binary reaction—from its entrance channel of
scattering reactants to the targeted products in a selected
internal state—is still an open goal. Realizing this dream
would create a new type of photochemistry with selective
control of yields and branching ratios.
Coherent control of bond formation in the gas phase
turned  out  to  be  so  difficult  because  it  starts  from  an
incoherent thermal ensemble. The laser pulse then needs
to  pick  those  scattering  pairs  which  show  some  correla-
tion  in  their  translational or  rotational motion.  Averag-
ing  over  rotations  can  be  avoided by  orienting  or  align-
ing the molecules using strong laser fields [
394]. Adiabatic
alignment occurs in-field and is achieved with nanosecond
pulses. In  contrast, femtosecond laser pulses create non-
adiabatic alignment that persists after the pulse is over.
This  second  option  where  the  alignment  is  produced  in
field-free conditions is more interesting in view of the ap-
plications since the laser pulse does not disturb the molec-
ular system [
374,399].
Spatial averaging in the gas phase implies an integral
over  the  beam  profile  and  blurs  coherent  effects  as  the
atoms  or  molecules  are  exposed  to  different  intensities.
8Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
Spatial resolution is thus a prerequisite for control [
193].
Subwavelength dynamic localization of the laser intensity
can  be  achieved  on  the  nanometre  scale  [
3],  lifting  the
restrictions of conventional optics. Optimal control theory
can be used for spatial shaping of the laser fields used in
nanoexcitation [
314].
Another way to overcome thermal and spatial averag-
ing  is  by  cooling  and  trapping  the  atoms  or  molecules.
Coherent control was suggested as a method to cool inter-
nal molecular degrees of freedom [
22,23]. This has been
realized experimentally for cooling vibrations of ultracold
cesium  dimers  [388]  and  rotations of  trapped  aluminum
hydride ions [
253]. While restrictions imposed on the cool-
ing efficiency by the molecular structure can be  circum-
vented using optimal control [
334], a persistent challenge
to cooling internal molecular degrees of freedom are the
timescale separation between vibrations and rotations as
well  as  the  enormous  bandwidths  that  are  required  for
strong bonds. In order to prepare molecules that are cold
in their translational degrees of freedom, molecules are as-
sembled from atoms which are much easier to cool. How-
ever, a major problem in creating molecules from atoms is
the extreme change in time and length scale. Optimal con-
trol was studied to overcome this issue [
220]. Initial exper-
iments employed the simple scheme of a chirped pulse to
compress two atoms to closer proximity [
449]. This can be
viewed as a first step in ultracold laser-induced, i.e., photo-
association. Association yielding ultracold molecules in a
single internal quantum state has been demonstrated em-
ploying  magnetic  field  ramps  (magneto-association)  fol-
lowed by STIRAP-type protocols [
95,293]. An experimen-
tal challenge still unfulfilled is complete coherent control
of ultracold photoassociation.
One of the important issues here, particularly in poly-
atomics, is the need for accurate ground and excited po-
tential energy surfaces to design optimal pulses a priori,
as well as to interpret the mechanism of pulses that are
found by experimental optimization. For this reason there
has  been  significant  interest  in  recent  years in  inverting
the information in optical spectroscopies in order to recon-
struct excited state potential energy surfaces [
17,18,252].
In addition to making or breaking chemical bonds, co-
herent control has demonstrated its versatility in study-
ing energy transfer [
165] and for spectroscopy. The latter
includes  in  particular  non-linear  and  multi-dimensional
spectroscopies  [
110,133,162,376]  and  microscopy  [89,
110,308]. In  this context, coherent control allows to in-
crease both the resolution and the specificity to a single
molecule.  Originally  developed  with  phase-locked  time-
delayed laser pulses, non-linear and multi-dimensional spec-
troscopies utilize the interference created by these pulses.
Laser pulse shaping not only lifts  the constraint of hav-
ing separate pulse beams in non-linear spectroscopy and
microscopy [
110,162,376], it also addresses naturally the
requirement to  decipher  the interference which is  at the
basis of the non-linear spectroscopies. Eventually, this un-
derstanding has lead to the use of laser pulse shaping in
optical imaging with  compensation of  the  effect  of  scat-
tering  media  such  as  biological  tissue  [
12,195];  optical
microscopy with  enhanced  chemical  sensitivity  and  con-
trast  [
299,301,315,331];  chemical  analysis  and  detec-
tion  via  optical  discrimination  [
86,214,248,397];  can-
cer  diagnosis  [
273];  and  material  processing  [122].  Simi-
larly, laser pulse shaping is expected to enhance chemical
sensitivity in other detection methods such as mass spec-
troscopy [
33,411].
Initially, the coherent control of molecules, be it in the
context of chemical reactions or non-linear spectroscopies
or energy transfer, considered the dynamics of the nuclear
degrees of freedom, using femtosecond laser pulses as the
main  workhorse. More recently,  the  focus  has  shifted  to
controlling electron dynamics. This is being made possible
by the development of advanced x-ray sources which probe
the dynamics of electrons within atoms and molecules on
attosecond time scales. Their potential for exploring the
quantum nature of  the nanoworld is unprecedented. For
example, using xuv and x-ray light for multidimensional
spectroscopy  could  probe  valence  excitations  locally  on
different atomic sites in a molecule. This would be invalu-
able  for  understanding energy  transfer  in  biological sys-
tems and quantum devices. The use of x-ray light sources
is  currently  facing  a  number  of  challenges  that  can  be
tackled by quantum optimal control. First of all, the large
energy of xuv and x-ray pulses results in a high probabil-
ity of ionization, reflecting the problem of controllability
when  a  continuum  of  states  is  involved.  This  has  been
addressed  in  a  recent  study,  where  optimal  control  the-
ory was used to predict experimentally feasible pulses to
drive xuv-Raman excitations through the ionization con-
tinuum [
151].
Another control problem is the creation of the xuv light
pulses  themselves.  In  particular,  high  harmonic  genera-
tion, where a very strong near-infrared femtosecond laser
pulse accelerates an electron in such a way that it emits
xuv light, is an ideal candidate for coherent control: The-
oretical  predictions  for  optimum  driving  should  be  easy
to adapt in experiment, given the existing pulse shaping
capabilities. The challenge that high harmonic generation
poses to optimal control theory is a frequency-domain tar-
get [
358,375,445]. A conclusive answer whether shaping
the femtosecond laser pulses can improve high harmonic
generation has not yet been provided.
Optimal  control theory was first  applied to  chemical
reactions using Krotov’s method [
389,407] and gradient
ascent  [
156,466].  The  theory  was  quickly  extended  to
Liouville  space  [
22,454]  to  treat  condensed  phase  situ-
ations and cooling. The major experimental constraint in
expimerents with shaped femtosecond laser pulses is the
fixed bandwidth. This can be accounted for by including
frequency filtering in the optimization [
146,237,366,438]
or  by  imposing  spectral  constraints  [
305,335].  Optimal
control techniques have also been applied with success to
molecular  alignment  and  orientation  in  gas  phase  [
393].
The design of optimal solutions has allowed to reach the
best  possible  degree  of  alignment  and  orientation  [
352]
within the experimental constraints such as temperature [
236]
or collisions [
328]. In addition to improving existing con-
trol strategies, optimal control has also been used to ex-
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control9
plore new regimes of alignment dynamics such as planar
alignment [171].
3.2 Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges
Thirty  years  after  the  conception  of  reaction  control,  it
is  fair  to  ask  whether  the  idea  of  coherently  controlling
a chemical reaction can work at all. In this respect it is
important to realize that the basic ingredients for achiev-
ing this goal have all been developed. The challenge that
remains to be overcome, is their assembly and application
to a specific reaction. The dream of coherently controlling
a chemical reaction all the way from its entrance channel
to the reaction products thus seems to be within reach. It
includes the controlled formation (or photoassociation) of
a new chemical bond, the controlled dynamics of the in-
termediate complex, most likely involving a conical inter-
section, the controlled cleavage of another chemical bond
as well as the stabilization of the reaction product. Realis-
tically, demonstration of control over a complete reaction
can be expected within the next few years for a sufficiently
simple reaction complex, involving only a few atoms.
Experimental  techniques  are  currently  developed  to
trap and cool a single molecule. These are particularly ad-
vanced for single molecular ions [
164,346]. The molecules
can be simple diatomics or large biological chromophors
such as rhodopsin. Such trapped species are ideal candi-
dates  for  control,  inducing  for  example  isomerization  in
rhodopsin. Instead of trapping and cooling molecules di-
rectly,  they  can  also  be  assembled  from  cold  atoms  one
by one. The number of different atoms which have been
cooled  and  trapped  has  been  increasing  steadily.  Atoms
other  than  the  first  row  alkali  metals  have  the  poten-
tial  for  complex  chemistry  with  multipole  bonds.  This
raises  the  challenge  of  assembling  molecules  from  these
constituents.  The  experimental  obstacle  is  the  develop-
ment  of  pulse  shaping techniques  in  the  picosecond and
nanosecond range.
Another mid-term goal for quantum control is the con-
trol of electron dynamics. The capability to control elec-
trons  implies  Angstrom-scale ultrafast  imaging  methods
which  can  be  realized  in  the  form  of  laser-induced  elec-
tron diffraction and high-harmonic spectroscopy. Specific
mid-term goals that seem within reach using these tools
include  the  control of  subfemtosecond charge migration;
the controlled generation of spin-polarized electrons from
laser ionization; recognition of the absolute configuration
of  chiral  molecules  with  shaped  laser  pulses;  and,  using
high-harmonic spectroscopy of molecules, ultrafast imag-
ing of structure and dynamics on sub-atomic length scales.
3.3 Long-term vision
3.3.1 Synthesis
The ultimate chemical synthetic challenge is to assemble
large  chiral  molecules  from  elementary  building  blocks.
Currently such syntheses are carried out in solution where
the chemical products are stabilized by entropy generation
caused  by  heat  transfer  to  the  environment.  The  vision
would be composed of synthesis by photoassociation via
polarization shaped light where the  final product is sta-
blized by laser cooling and trapped by light.
3.3.2 Analysis
The vision is a light field  tailored to  a specific molecule
or functional group generating a specific physical outcome
such as light emission or ionization. Such a capability will
enhance  the  threshold  of  detection  of  a  specific  hazard
or in medical applications. Combined with spatial super-
resolution, the analytic methods are expected to find ap-
plications in molecular-scale microscopy.
4 Magnetic resonance
The optimal control of spin dynamics is at the heart of well
established magnetic resonance technologies and of emerg-
ing new fields of quantum technologies. Nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) [
2,125,247], electron spin
resonance  spectroscopy  (ESR)  [
373]  and  magnetic  reso-
nance imaging (MRI) [
32] are based on the control of nu-
clear  or  electron  spins  with  the  help  of  time-dependent
electromagnetic fields. In fact, magnetic resonance is one
of the most impressive success stories of quantum control
and technology.
The mathematical description of the state and dynam-
ics  of  nuclear  spins  or  electron  spins  is  essentially  iden-
tical  to  the  canonical  description  of  abstract  quantum
bits (qubits). In terms of the theoretical and experimen-
tal control of spins or qubits, NMR had a long head start
compared to other quantum technologies as the commu-
nity has actively explored and developed quantum-control
methods for more than 60 years. This was driven by many
very concrete and important applications in physics, chem-
istry, biochemistry, biology and medicine. The interdisci-
plinary impact of quantum-control enabled magnetic res-
onance is impressively reflected by Nobel prizes in physics
(Felix Bloch, Edward Purcell, 1952), chemistry (Richard
Ernst,  1991; Kurt  W ̈uthrich;  2002), and  medicine  (Paul
Lauterbur, Peter Mansfield, 2003) [
124,268,451].
Today, NMR is arguably the  most important tool in
chemistry to  determine  the  molecular  structure  and  dy-
namics of molecules. ESR is an essential technique in radi-
cal reaction chemistry, catalysis, electrochemistry and pho-
tosynthesis  research.  MRI  is  one  of  the  most  informa-
tive and frequently used modalities in medical diagnostics.
The  huge  range  of  practical  applications  has  generated
multi-billion dollar branch of the instrument manufactur-
ing industry (Bruker, Siemens, Phillips, General Electric,
JEOL,  etc.).  This  in  turn  has  resulted  in  the  continu-
ous development of more and more sophisticated instru-
ments with superb flexibility in terms of the available con-
trol schemes: For example, arbitrary waveform generators
and linear amplifies are standard NMR and MRI equip-
ment for more than three decades (and have more recently
10Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
also  become  available  with  sub-nanosecond  time  resolu-
tion  for  ESR  applications  [196,391]).  With  their  help,
even very complex  pulse shapes  can routinely  be  imple-
mented with high fidelity [
217]. The excellent agreement
between theory and experiments (as a result of the highly
accurate theoretical description of the physics of coupled
spins and the availability of very reliable hardware to im-
plement  virtually  arbitrary pulse  sequences  and  shapes)
also has made NMR an attractive testing ground for the
experimental demonstration of new control approaches for
finite-dimensional quantum systems in general. Concepts
of quantum control and sophisticated quantum-control de-
sign tools developed in the field of NMR have found many
applications in other fields, such as in quantum informa-
tion processing [
185,348,427], optics (photon echos) [232],
in  neutron  scattering  or  in  the  control  of  nano  devices
based on quantum dots, artificial atoms etc.
Two important emerging fields of magnetic resonance
are hyperpolarization methods for bulk NMR and the con-
trol and measurement of individual spins or spin systems,
e.g.  of  NV  centers  in  diamond  with  many  potential  ap-
plications in sensing and quantum information processing
[
105,159,182]. Hyperpolarization techniques (also known
as spin  cooling), [
227,357,431] can generate highly po-
larized non-thermal spin states. Hence, the relatively low
sensitivity of NMR (due to the small magnetic moments
of nuclear spins and the resulting weak thermal polariza-
tion) can be overcome by using a variety of approaches.
In particular, there are two different methods  that have
recently become increasingly popular in practical applica-
tions. The first one is based on transfer of the much higher
thermal polarization from unpaired electrons onto the nu-
clear  spin  ensemble  in  a  process called  dynamic  nuclear
polarization (DNP) [
153,294,302]. The second method in-
volves the use of parahydrogen and a transfer of its highly
populated singlet spin state onto nuclear spins in receptor
molecules [
48]. Both methods have been known already for
many years but only recently significant progress has been
made in terms of a full quantum description of the under-
pinning spin physics and the optimization of the required
experimental hardware.
The detection and control of individual nuclear spins
close to Nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centers in diamond [
181,
287] is a premier example of a new area of optimal con-
trol of individual spin systems. In these experiments, sin-
gle nuclear-spin detection is achieved by an efficient read-
out  based  on  couplings  of  the  nuclear  spins  to  electron
spin  states  and  their  detection  using  optical  techniques.
In the field of spintronics, spins of individual atoms (such
as
31
Pdonors)  or  quantum  dots  can  be  electrically  de-
tected and controlled by radio- or microwave pulses with
high fidelity[
19,317].
4.1 State of the art
The design of pulse sequences that provide maximum sen-
sitivity,  selectivity,  as well  as  maximum  resilience  to  in-
strumental imperfections, is central in the ongoing effort
to  improve  magnetic  resonance  technologies.  Both  ana-
lytical and numerical methods have been used to design
multiple-pulse sequences (including composite or shaped
pulses).
Since the 1950s, the field  of NMR  has been  a highly
active  ”breeder”  for  methods  to  control  finite-dimensio-
nal quantum systems. The wide spectrum of applications
has motivated the development of more and more sophis-
ticated tools for quantum control in a quest to push the
experimental performance to their limits. Pulsed magnetic
resonance  techniques  such  as  the  two-pulse  Hahn  echo
and the three-pulse stimulated echo [
161] were important
milestones on the path to multiple-pulse sequences, which
often consist of tens or hundred thousands of individual
pulses with defined amplitudes and phases. This was en-
abled by the development of theoretical tools such as Av-
erage Hamiltonian Theory (AHT) [
160] and the symmetry
analysis of composite pulses and multiple-pulse cycles and
supercycles [
131,245,246,247].
More recently, sophisticated theoretical approaches of
geometric optimal  control  theory  [
34,44,188,206,208,
209,322] have been applied to quantum control problems
motivated by magnetic resonance applications. Although
these analytical approaches are typically limited  to low-
dimensional  quantum  systems,  they  are  able  to  provide
the best possible solutions to a given problem by proving
global optimality. The resulting physical performance lim-
its are important theoretical results in their own right and
also provide benchmarks for numerical and experimental
optimization  techniques.  Geometric  optimal  control  has
been very successfully applied to highly non-trivial exam-
ples of uncoupled and coupled spins both in the absence
and presence of relaxation (dissipation and decoherence).
For example, based on geometrical optimal control anal-
ysis,  the  minimal  time  for  quantum  gates  in  systems  of
two  and  three  coupled  spins  (qubits)  have  been  deter-
mined  and  experimentally  implemented  [
208,209,339].
And  in  this  context,  the  so-called  quantum-gate  design
metric was discovered, which plays an important role for
the design of so-called geodesic unitary gates [
203,209].
For example, time-optimal control schemes for the simu-
lation of effective trilinear couplings in systems with only
next-neighbor couplings were derived based on geometric
optimal  control  and  experimentally  demonstrated  using
NMR. This is a particularly impressive example, because
in the limit of small time increments∆t
sim
under the simu-
lated trilinear Hamiltonian, the actual duration of the con-
trols  also  approaches zero,  whereas  previous  approaches
based  on  AHT  have  a  minimal  duration  of  1/(2J),  i.e.
for∆t
sim
→0,  the  gain  of  the  optimal-control schemes
approaches infinity [
203,209]. Examples of geometric op-
timal  control applications involving singular  arcs [
34]  in
NMR  are  relaxation-optimized  polarization  transfer  ex-
periments [
205,206,291,395], minimal-time controls for
the saturation of spins, [
238], for maximizing contrast in
MRI  [
240]  and  for  maximizing  the  achievable  signal-to-
noise ratio per unit time [
234,261].
Since the 1980s, numerical algorithms such as conju-
gate gradients, downhill  simplex  (Nelder  Mead),  genetic
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control11
algorithms and simulated annealing have been applied to
find efficient and robust quantum-control schemes for mag-
netic resonance applications [
130,132,140,254,289,423].
Powerful  optimal-control  algorithms  based  on  the  Pon-
tryagin Maximum Principle (PMP) were applied already
since  the  mid  1980s  to  the  design  of  shaped  pulses  for
the manipulation of nuclear spin ensembles [
84,174,175].
Potent variants of these PMP-based algorithms were also
developed in the context of NMR applications for coupled
spins in NMR spectroscopy and quantum information pro-
cessing [
98,210,250]. They are able to optimize pulse se-
quences for an ensemble of spin systems with realistic pa-
rameter ranges for detunings, scalings of the control field
etc.,  i.e. they  can take into account variations or  uncer-
tainties of experimental parameters. Numerical ensemble-
control methods have resulted in extremely powerful con-
trol  schemes  with  unprecedented  resilience  to  pulse  im-
perfections, while at the same time taking experimentally
bounded control amplitudes and pulse energy limits into
account.
In  magnetic  resonance,  an  efficient  and  user-friendly
software  landscape  is  starting  to  emerge  –  there  are  a
few  software  packages  that  support  sophisticated  quan-
tum  mechanical  magnetic  resonance  simulations  as  well
as  optimal  control.  Spinach  [
169]  supports  all  forms  of
magnetic resonance spectroscopy under the same roof, im-
plements sophisticated spin relaxation theories as well as
most mainstream optimal control algorithms that are pre-
sently used in magnetic resonance spectroscopy: GRAPE
[
210], GRAPE-BFGS [98,264], Krotov [226] and Krotov-
BFGS  [
118].  Another  advantage of  Spinach  is  the  avail-
ability of polynomially scaling spin dynamics simulation
algorithms  that  make  previously  intractable  NMR  and
EPR  simulation  (and  therefore  control)  problems  acces-
sible  [
111,355].  In  the  solid-state NMR  community,  the
SIMPSON software package (SIMulation Program for SOlid
state Nuclear magnetic resonance) has been the most ex-
tensively used general-purpose software and also includes
an optimal control toolbox to facilitate robust experiment
design [
415]. MATPULSE [137,255], DYNAMO [264] and
QuTiP [
184] are versatile Matlab and Python based sim-
ulation and optimization programs. Other software pack-
ages  for  the  simulation  and/or  optimization  of  spin  dy-
namics include SIMONE [
141], OCTOPUS(SI) [115,215],
Gamma [
351] and SPINEVOLUTION [429].
Both analytical and numerical methods have been pro-
ven very effective for two- and three-level systems [
6,35,
35,38,41,42,43,135,138,139,233,238,239,286,381,
384,385,386,400,403,465], two uncoupled spins [15,16],
and two coupled spins  [
29,116,163,204,208,338,432,
457]. Moreover, significant progress has been made in un-
derstanding how to optimally control coupled spin systems
with more than two spins [
36,37,45,64,71,72,73,74,
202,203,209,235,296,339,363,369,395,396,424,440,
441,456,458,459,460,462]. Recent advances include ro-
bust  broadband  and  band-selective  pulses  in  NMR  and
ESR. Depending on their role in a given experiment, uni-
versal rotation (UR) pulses (e.g. for refocussing) or point-
to-point  (PP)  pulses  (e.g.  for  excitation  or  inversion  of
spins) are required. Systematic studies of the offset band-
width (range of detunings) and robustness with respect to
scaling of the control amplitude (width ofB
1
inhomogene-
ity distribution) of optimized PP [
218,219] and UR pulses
have been performed [
216]for experiments where the max-
imum  control  amplitudes  (e.g.  in  many  applications  of
NMR  or ESR spectroscopy) or  the pulse  energy (e.g. in
MRI) are experimentally limiting factors. For a desired fi-
delity, the bandwidth covered by a (composite or shaped)
pulse can be made much larger than the maximum con-
trol amplitude (maximum Rabi frequency) at the price of
increased pulse duration. Surprisingly, it was found empir-
ically that the pulse duration typically scales only linearly
with the desired offset range of operation. Hence, unprece-
dented fidelities can be achieved that are e.g. required for
quantitative NMR applications or for quantum error cor-
rection  schemes.  In  addition,  it  was  demonstrated  that
coherence transfer elements can be designed that are not
only  resilient  to  offset  and  control  amplitude  variations
but also to variations in coupling constants [
116,117].
In general, UR pulses are significantly longer than PP
pulses for the same error resilience, which was exploited
in a new strategy to  build complete  sequences based on
standardized UR pulses when necessary and standardized
PP pulses whenever they are sufficient [
295]. The recent
application  of  optimal  control  methods  to  the  problem
of  heteronuclear  decoupling  yields  not  only  significantly
improved performance, [
292,361] but also unprecedented
flexibility  in  the  design  of  tailored  decoupling  sequences
[
223,360,464]. Individual pulses were also optimized for
Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill echo train sequences [
39,267].
Beyond  individually  optimized  pulses,  the  simultaneous
optimization  of  pulses  provides  significant  performance
gains by  exploiting  cooperative effects  either  in  a  single
scan [
50] or in multiple scans [51] with first applications
in Ramsey-type experiments and in Hahn echo sequences.
In liquid-state NMR, optimized broadband pulses have
found applications in a number of experiments. Early ex-
amples  are  the  CLIP-HSQC  [
123]  and  P.E.HSQC  [421]
for the measurement of one-bond and geminal couplings
as well as more recent experiments involving homonuclear
decoupling  [
337]  and  the  rapid  acquisition  of  heteronu-
clear correlation experiments [
371]. All these experiments
are of special interest as they are recorded in large num-
bers every day in chemical laboratories and improvements
in  robustness,  accuracy,  or  acquisition  time  are  of  high
interest.
For the specific conditions of solid-state NMR and ex-
periments  in  oriented  systems,  specific  pulse  sequences
have been  optimized  [
198,242,259,263,414,436,455].
In ESR spectroscopy, the first broadband optimal-control
pulses  have  recently  been  developed  and  experimentally
implemented [
196,391]. In this context, the efficiency of
novel approaches to take into account transient effects due
to  transfer  line  effects  and  limited  resonator  bandwidth
was  both  numerically  and  experimentally  demonstrated
[
391].
Motivated by magnetic resonance imaging applications,
optimal control pulses have been developed [
84,154,174,
12Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
175,240,255,272,434,452].  Applications  include  im-
proved  spatially  selective  excitation  schemes  [
179,180,
382], pulses with minimal radio-frequency (rf) power and
pulses to counteract rf inhomogeneity in parallel transmis-
sion at ultra-high field [154,255]. For chemical exchange
saturation  transfer  (CEST)  imaging,  chemical  exchange
effects  were  taken  into  account  in  pulse  sequence  opti-
mizaion [
329].
In  DNP,  optimal  polarization  transfer  schemes  from
electron to nuclear spins have been investigated for a small
set of relatively simple model systems [
153,172,275,319,
320]. Optimal control was also used in conjunction with
the use of parahydrogen to generate high nuclear spin po-
larization. In particular, it was shown that the initial lon-
gitudinal  two-spin  order  arising  from  the  hydrogenation
reaction can be equally distributed between several spins
and converted into detectable magnetization [
52].
Geometric  and  numerical  tools  from  optimal  control
theory have not only provided pulse sequences of unprece-
dented quality and capabilities, but also new analytical in-
sight and a deeper understanding both of the mode of ac-
tion of optimal pulses. Numerically optimized pulses can
often  be  interpreted  as  robust  implementations  of  ana-
lytically derived optimal trajectories [
238]. These can be
understood based on geometrical concepts [
233]. In addi-
tion, useful tools have been developed to analyze complex
pulses  [
222]  and  the  resulting  dynamics  in  coupled  spin
systems [
136,229,320].
4.2 Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges
An important goal is to make optimal control algorithms
easier to use, generally applicable and to further increase
their  speed.  Depending  on  the  applications,  very  differ-
ent  convergence rates  are  encountered  and  a  systematic
characterization of optimal control landscapes is still miss-
ing.  With  more  efficient  numerical  optimizations  meth-
ods, optimal control theory will make it possible to design
problem-, sample- and patient-specific pulse sequences on
the  fly.  The  fast  reoptimization of pulse  sequences or  of
sequence elements, e.g. in response to the presence of mag-
netic susceptibility jumps, will significantly improve their
performance. In addition to MRI applications, this could
be important in production or process monitoring by NMR,
where the pulse sequence should be able to adapt to the
sample in the same way as shim currents currently do – ex-
amples are magnetic susceptibility and tuning variations
in imaging, metabolomics and oil well logging [
39].
Optimal  control methods are expected  to reduce the
time  which  is  required  to  determine  structural  and  dy-
namical information of biomolecules (e.g. proteins). In this
field, coping with large coupled spin networks, especially
in the presence of relaxation, is computationally hard and
further improved numerical/analytical approaches are high-
ly  desirable.  Characterizing  the  experimental  imperfec-
tions and fine-tuning the spectrometer and setting up the
experiment  is  time-consuming  and  efficient  closed  loop
feedback-based  automatic  procedures  have  to  be  devel-
oped, implemented and integrated with the adaptive de-
sign of pulse sequences to automate this process.
In the field of medical imaging it is expected that opti-
mal control methods will lead to more sensitive and more
efficient pulse sequences, such that a patient has to spend
less time  in  a scanner  for  an  examination.  This  may be
achievable by using multi-band excitation techniques and
optimized  image  acquisition  based  on  multiple  transmit
and  receive  channels.  Optimal  control  methods  are  also
expected to help in the extension of the clinical applica-
bility  of  ultra-high-field  scanners and  to  provide  in-vivo
spectroscopy with improved diagnostic value. Apart from
better  localized  excitation,  progress in  the  field  of  mag-
netization preparation (e.g. reducing the B
0
sensitivity of
fat saturation) might be achievable. Improved saturation
pulses are expected to be useful for many different task,
from chemical shift imaging (CSI) and chemical exchange
saturation transfer (CEST) imaging [
329] to single voxel
spectroscopy.  Also  methods  for  improved  quantification
accuracy and biomarker imaging are highly desirable.
Small  molecule  NMR  spectroscopy forms  the  central
basis of chemical analysis on a molecular level in solution.
Applications are already manifold, but are expected to in-
crease significantly during the next decade. Mostly identi-
fication and quantification of compounds in complex mix-
tures is needed. Especially for quantification tasks, meth-
ods to be derived from optimal control will deliver more
reliable  and  robust  results.  Optimal  control  derived  se-
quences will also improve the detection level of side prod-
ucts, making products safer and better defined. Especially
quality control of food, pharmaceuticals and other prod-
ucts  as well as metabolomics-type  applications and  per-
sonalized medicine will benefit from improved experiments
and thereby directly affect everyday life.
In the field of hyperpolarization, further hardware ad-
vances are expected, in particular in generating and mod-
ulating  high-frequency  microwave  fields  and  it  is  envis-
aged  that  optimal  control  methods  will  play  an  impor-
tant role in the development of more sophisticated exper-
imental  schemes  to  transfer  the  electron  polarization  to
surrounding nuclear spins. Ideas how to control electron-
nuclear spin systems in a optimal way have already been
published and discussed. This includes the manipulation
of  the  nuclear  spins  using  the  anisotropy  of  the  hyper-
fine interaction [
168,207] and the exploitation of repeated
generation of dipolar  spin  order to  enhance polarization
transport by spin diffusion [
99]. Since more sophisticated
catalysts are being developed for parahydrogenation reac-
tions [
357], it is also anticipated that pulse shapes derived
from  optimal  control  principles  will  be  more  frequently
used to maximize the achievable polarization and to me-
diate polarization transfer to specific molecular site.
4.3 Long-term vision
Important  theoretical  and  practical  aspects  of  optimal
control  in  magnetic  resonance  are  the  physical  limits  of
quantum  dynamics.  On  the  one  hand,  the  questions  of
quantum state reachability in dissipative systems remain
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control13
largely  unresolved.  On  the  other,  many  practical  usage
scenarios are time-constrained, and a more general under-
standing of the best possible performance in a give amount
of time is highly desirable.
A very desirable outcome of the continued progress in
optimal control technology could be that, for a given level
of performance, the use of optimal control sequences could
significantly reduce the instrument costs as well as costs of
sample  preparation and  purification.  Sophisticated  shim
coils,  frequency  locks,  complicated  combinations  of  sus-
ceptibility  matched  materials in  NMR  probes and  other
expensive  arrangements  had  originally  been  introduced
to  maximize  spectral  resolution  and  selectivity.  If  both
could be achieved by tailored pulse sequences under less
than ideal conditions, the complexity could be transferred
from the instrument design to the mathematical optimiza-
tion  procedure.  The  concomitant  reduction  of  hardware
cost could result in more affordable instruments, e.g. for
MRI  examinations.  Also,  the  integration  of  control  de-
sign with image reconstruction and spectral calculation in
NMR  and with  instrument  design could result in  better
performance. The combination of open loop and feedback
strategies  may  result  in  fast  and  fully  automated  tune-
up  procedures, which  would  further  reduce the  required
experimental time.
A long-term vision of magnetic resonance techniques is
the detection of the nuclear spins of individual molecules,
such  as  a  protein.  The  ability  to  image  the  shape  of  a
single molecule similar to the way we can image humans
today would revolutionize structural biology and the ra-
tional and efficient development of medication. The recent
developments in sensing based ib NV centers in diamonds
(see section
5) may provide a potential road to this goal,
as well as completely new application areas e.g. in medical
diagnostics.
5 Quantum information and communication
5.1 State of the art
Quantum  technologies (see,  e.g.,  [
109])  exploit  quantum
coherence and entanglement as essential elements of quan-
tum physics. Applications include high-precision measure-
ments and sensing, which would reach unprecedented sen-
sitivity, the simulation of physical and biological systems,
which would be impossible to study otherwise, and quan-
tum  information  processing, which  would  allow  to  solve
computationally  hard  problems.  Successful  implementa-
tion of quantum technologies faces the  challenge to pre-
serve the relevant nonclassical features at the level of de-
vice operation. More specifically, each task of the device
operation needs to be carried out with sufficient accuracy,
despite  imperfections  and potentially  detrimental effects
of  the  surroundings.  Quantum  optimal  control  not  only
provides toolboxes  that  allow  for  identifying  the  perfor-
mance  limits  for  a  given  device  implementation,  it  also
provides the protocols for realizing device operation within
those limits.
Prominent tasks include the preparation of useful quan-
tum  states  as  well  as  implementation  of  quantum  oper-
ations.  The  power  of  the  quantum  optimal  control  ap-
proach  for  implementing  these  tasks  has  very  recently
been demonstrated in a number of impressive experiments.
For example, nonclassical motional states of a Bose-Ein-
stein  condensate  were  prepared  with  optimized  control
sequences  for  wavepacket  interferometry  [
426],  and  the
loading  of  an  ultracold  atomic  gas  into  an  optical  lat-
tice was improved [
345]. With respect to quantum opera-
tions, quantum optimal control allowed for error resistant
single-qubit gates with trapped  ions [412] and  for single
qubit  gates  without  the  need  for  invoking  the  rotating
wave approximation in nitrogen vacancy (NV) centers in
diamond  [
359].  For  the  latter  platform,  optimal  control
is also at the basis of a spectroscopy protocol allowing to
image nanoscale magnetic fields [
159]. In quantum proces-
sor candidates based on superconducting circuits, leakage
to  non-computational  states  in  the  most  common  type
of  qubit,  the  transmon  [
78,260,284],  was  avoided  and
frequency  crowding  was  accomodated  [
372,430]  thanks
to  optimal  control  results.  Closed-loop  optimal  control
[
112,199]  enabled  fine-tuning  of  gates  that  were  deter-
mined manually, allowing them to reach consistent record
fidelities  within  this  platform.  Control  of  donor  qubits
in Si has been achieved and characterized [
285]. Control
strategies for spins in semiconductors currently trade off
conceptually  simple  single-spin  schemes  [
197,316]  with
more robust and accessible two- and three spin techniques
[211,274,313]. The short natural time scales suggest adi-
abatic  schemes  to  be  attractive  [
49,126,152]  In  view
of  scaling  up  control,  the  design  and  implementation  of
unitary  maps  have  recently  been  demonstrated  in  a  16-
dimensional  Hilbert  space,  spanned  by  the  electron  and
nuclear spins of individual cesium atoms [
13].
The use of control methods in a broader sense has al-
lowed  for  further  significant  experimental  achievements,
such as to improve of the coherence of a qubit, realized by
the electron spin in an NV center, using dynamical decou-
pling [
66]. A famous further example of high-end control
techniques is the Paris experiment of stabilizing a quan-
tum  state  with  predefined  photon  number  via  real-time
closed-loop feedback [
356], which required to include the
noise back-action of  controls onto the  system  by way of
stochastic differential calculus.
These experimental achievements were preceded by a
large  number  of  theoretical  predictions  on  how  optimal
control may improve or enable quantum state preparation,
operation  and  readout.  State  preparation  protocols  in-
clude transport of atoms [
96] and ions [134,378] as well as
transport in a spin chain [
68,202,290,296,363,396,456],
photon storage [
148], preparation of squeezed states [155],
cluster-states [
127], non-classical states in a cavity [344] or
in spin chains [
440,441], as well as preparation of a quan-
tum register [
107] and many-body entangled states [70]—
to name just a few.
Likewise,  optimal  control  helped  to  implement  high-
fidelity quantum gates such as two-qubit gates with neu-
tral atoms in dipole traps [
67,108], on atom chips [418],
14Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
or with Rydberg atoms [87,143], two-qubit gates between
ions [
323], between an ion and an atom [103], error-correct-
ing qubit gates of electron and nuclear spins within single
NV centers [
437], or entangling gates between distant NV
centers [
105]. For superconducting qubits [80], two-qubit
gates  were  optimized,  starting  from  Cooper  pair  boxes
[
88,183,281,392]  to  modern  transmon-based  schemes
[
114,145].  In  these  optimizations,  special  attention  was
paid to robustness against noise [
281,330] which can even
be used as a tool for control [
333]. Also, readout has been
addressed [
113]. In order to adapt to the strong filtering of
control lines in superconducting qubits, transfer functions
had to be taken into account [
167,176,283,391] and ex-
perimental fluctuations and noise were accomodated [
145,
282,440]. Fidelity limits on two-qubit gates due to deco-
herence were studied for Markovian [
144,145,368] as well
as non-Markovian [
128] time evolutions. It is noteworthy
in  this  context that  non-Markovian time  evolutions also
play a role in quantum simulation, e.g., of collision mod-
els [
350].
In  view  of  quantum  computation,  it  has  been  sug-
gested how to retain universality in spite of limited local
control [
64,440] by using environmental degrees of free-
dom  [
333].  The  Jones  polynomial,  i.e.,  a  central  invari-
ant in knot theory, can be evaluated, using an NMR spin
ensemble at ambient temperature, in an algorithm equiv-
alent to  deterministic  quantum computing  with  a  single
pure qubit [
271,307,367].
In  order  to  obtain  these  results,  the  quantum  opti-
mal  control  methodology  had  to  be  adapted  to  the  re-
quirements of Quantum Technologies. Optimization algo-
rithms had to be derived for specific quantum gates [
303,
304,408], dissipative evolution as seen in the reduced sys-
tem  dynamics  [
144,190,330,368],  or  exploiting  invari-
ants in system-bath models [
150], optimization up to lo-
cal  equivalence classes [
288],  which  can also be  used  for
arbitrary  perfect  entanglers  [
142,443]  or  optimizing  for
many-body  entanglement  [
318].  Moreover,  control  tech-
niques were adapted to non-linear dynamics as found in
a BEC [170,177,387] and to general dynamics, function-
als and couplings to be controlled [
332]. Many-body sys-
tems can be optimized numerically with the chopped ran-
dom  basis  (CRAB)  method  [
69,107]  by  interfacing  the
time-dependent density matrix renormalization group (t-
DMRG) with parameter optimization via e.g. the simplex
algorithm. Other techniques specifically cover robustness
with  respect  to  experimental  fluctuations  or  noise  [
144,
145,344,440] or filters in experimental implementation of
controls [
167,176,283,391].
5.2 Mid-term prospects: goals and challenges
The  field  of  quantum  technologies  has  matured  to  the
point that quantum enhancement is explored beyond quan-
tum computation only. Devices such as quantum simula-
tors or quantum sensors are currently under active devel-
opment. Control methods will be crucial to operate these
devices reliably and  accurately. This  involves the  device
preparation,  or  reset,  the  execution  of  the  desired  time
evolution, and the readout of the result. These tasks set
the agenda for the next few years.
More specifically, central mid-term milestones include
the  robust  implementation  of  gates  in  a  multi-qubit  ar-
chitecture, finding solutions to readout and fast reset lim-
itations, automatization of  key tasks of  surface  code  er-
ror  correction  and  optimal  as  well  as  robust  generation
of multi-particle entangled states for a variety of quantum
technology platforms. All of these will require decoherence
control.
A  main  challenge  for  optimal  quantum  control  is  to
reach  convergence  of  numerical  optimal  control  and  ex-
perimentation. To date, either optimal control is used for
computer-aided discovery of analytical schemes that can
be  remodeled  in  an  experiment  or  the  quantum  proces-
sor itself is employed to calibrate gates. In order to better
combine numerical optimal control and experimentation,
the  modeling  of  qubits  as  well  as  errors and  other  non-
idealities  of  the  system,  in  particular  for  open  systems,
needs  to  be  improved  and  the  robustness  of  pulses  en-
hanced. Also, optimized pulses should initially be reduced
to few parameters before more complicated and effective
solutions can be pursued. On the other hand, pulse shap-
ing platforms need improvement.
Coming to specific quantum technology platforms, ap-
plications of quantum control in superconducting qubits
should follow the current European thrust towards analog
and digital quantum simulation and lead to the prepara-
tion of entangled ground states, fast and accurate quan-
tum gates and tools for quantum machines. For some in-
stances,  compatibility  with  quantum  error  correction  is
desired.  For  trapped  ions,  it  seems  realistic  to  combine
quantum gates with ion transport in segmented traps, us-
ing optimal control techniques, which can also be applied
to the systematic optimization of pulse sequences for effi-
cient generation of complex operations. In the field of cold
atoms, challenges for optimal control are twofold. On the
side of quantum simulations, the  goal is to enable high-
fidelity preparation and manipulation of many-body quan-
tum states of increasing complexity, with and without lo-
cal control. On the side of quantum communication, the
goal is  to  enable  efficient  interconversion between  flying
qubits and quantum memories via coherent atom-photon
coupling, with and without cavities. In the case of color
centers in diamond, with major applications in quantum
sensing, the goal is to enhance the sensitivity of the de-
fect spins employed as quantum probes via improved pro-
tection from environmental noise e.g. through dynamical
decoupling techniques.
In  general,  control  techniques  are  expected  to  con-
tribute to decoupling and dissipative state-engineering [
62,
225,428], for instance in view of enhancing the lifetime of
quantum  memories.  In  order  to  improve  the  lifetime  of
a  quantum  register,  control  can  also  be  used  to  imple-
ment error-correcting gates and circuits [
437]. Moreover,
while quantum compilation, i.e., the translation of a uni-
tary gate into the machine language of pulses and evolu-
tions, can readily be done via optimal control up to some
10 qubits [
370], a scalable assembler of elementary gates
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control15
(up  to  10  qubits)  into  many  qubits  is  an  open  problem
that may benefit from tensor-contraction techniques.
Both  numerical optimal control and  closed-loop con-
trol  are  expected  to  be  useful  for  tackling  these  goals.
Numerical  optimal  control  has  the  advantage  of  versa-
tility, whereas closed-loop control can easily be tuned to
specific  tasks  such  as  determining  parameter  uncertain-
ties.  A  hybridization  of  both  approaches  is  conceivable
as  well.  The  main  difficulties  that  need  to  be  overcome
to reach the above mentioned mid-term milestones are a
sufficiently  accurate  modelling  of  complex  quantum  dy-
namics to build control on top, integration of tomography
and  system  identification  with  optimal  control,  efficient
ways  to  take  into  account  experimental  constraints  and
uncertainties, and bridging the gap between the quantum
control community and the communities of the respective
quantum technology platforms.
5.3 Long-term vision
Several current quantum technology platforms show a strong
scaling potential. Thus in the long term, control schemes
need to be made scalable. This represents a severe chal-
lenge, but meeting this challenge will make quantum con-
trol a basic building block of every quantum technology
and ensure, at the same time, their proper functioning in
a world that is only partially quantum.
Take the examples of superconducting qubits, NC cen-
ters  or  spins  in  Si,  where  fabrication  is  a  key  task  that
could and should be improved by control techniques. The
controlled  adjustment  of  fabrication  parameters  should
be  simple,  and  the  qubits  should  to  a  certain extent  be
robust  to  the  influences  of  the  rest  of  the  architecture
they  are  placed  in.  Independent  of  a  specific  platform,
error correction at large, for instance by toric codes [
21,
129],  is  one  of  the  strategic  long-term  goals  that  is  ex-
pected to benefit from control techniques given recent ad-
vances  by  randomized  benchmarking  [199].  To  this  end,
system-identification protocols matched with optimal con-
trol modules will be of importance. A pioneering step in
this direction was made by the ADHOC technique [
112]
that combines open-loop control as a first step with closed-
loop feedback learning (with implicit  parameter identifi-
cation). Moreover, taking quantum control algorithms to
match with tensor-contraction techniques in order to ad-
dress quantum-many body systems (where first steps have
been  made  by  CRAB  [
69,107])  is  expected  to  pave the
way to more accurate handling of experimental quantum
simulation setups.
In  short,  quantum  control  will  be  the  means  to  get
the  most  performance  out  of  an  imperfect  system  and
combine  challenging  physics  at  the  few-qubit  level  with
engineering at the multi-qubit level. This should aim for
example  at  enabling  quantum  simulations  that  are  im-
possible on classical computers. In addition, the  realiza-
tion of the following long-term goals, using optimal con-
trol techniques, seems challenging yet conceivable: demon-
strating  the  practical  usefulness  of  engineered  quantum
states,  for  example  in  quantum  metrology;  implement-
ing  reliable  strategies  for  the  control  of  mesoscopic  sys-
tems; exploring the dynamics of quantum many-body sys-
tems  beyond  equilibrium;  and  understanding  the  micro-
scopic origin of thermodynamic laws. In other words, the
long-term goal of quantum optimal control for  quantum
technologies is to develop a software layer enhancing the
performance  of  quantum  hardware for  tasks  in  comput-
ing,  simulation,  communication,  metrology  and  sensing
beyond  what  is  achievable  by  classical  means,  enabling
the achievement of quantum supremacy [
324].
6 Prospects for applications and commercial
exploitation
Quantum-control enabled technologies have potential for
truly revolutionary innovation. More sophisticated quan-
tum  control  techniques  are  making  current  technologies
more powerful and also help to create novel technologies,
e.g.  in  sensing  with  super  sensitive  magnetic  detectors,
microscopic temperature measurement devices, molecular
imaging etc.  Better  control of quantum  systems has the
potential to significantly reduce instrument costs, turning
perhaps million dollar NMR spectrometers into small and
portable devices with many new fields of applications.
As visible above, quantum optimal control applications
broadly fall into two classes: Applications to novelquan-
tum technologiesand applications in chemistry-related ar-
eas  such  as  spin  resonance.  The  magnetic  resonance  in-
dustry as we know it today would not exist without quan-
tum control. Novel optimal control strategies have already
been implemented in commercial NMR spectrometers and
implementations of optimal control sequences in MRI are
being pursued. Clearly, with more and more improved se-
quences  being  developed,  this  trend  is  expected  to  con-
tinue. Other chemistry-related applications where coher-
ent control plays out powerfully are imaging, optical mi-
croscopy and various variants of spectroscopy as well as
chemical analysis where shaped laser pulses improve the
resolution and enhance the specificity to a particular mo-
lecule.  Areas  of  application  range from  remote  chemical
detection all the way to cancer diagnosis.
On the other end of the spectrum, there is presently an
emerging industrial effort in Quantum Computing lead by
IBM, Google, and Microsoft. The first two companies have
invested into the development of superconducting qubits
and both of them use optimal control techniques [
88,199].
This is no coincidence - optimal control can have impact
in systems that have reached some technical maturity in
research laboratories, which is the point at which indus-
try gets interested. Further industrial perspectives will be
linked to the further development of a quantum technolo-
gies industry. Early convergence could happen in quantum
sensing, which takes sensing ideas similar to those appear-
ing in spin resonance and combines them with ideas from
quantum technologies.
16Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
7 Conclusions
Quantum control is a key facilitator for spectroscopy and
imaging as well as AMO physics and emerging quantum
technologies for computation, simulation, metrology, sens-
ing  and  communication.  For  all  these  applications,  it  is
crucial  to  reach the  required  precision  given  experimen-
tal limits on control amplitudes, power, timing, accuracy
of instruments as well as the ever-present interaction with
the environment. Optimal control theory provides a frame-
work to identify which quantum tasks can be accomplished
with what precision in the presence of decoherence and ex-
perimental imperfections and limitations.
Quantum control systems theory will require the inte-
gration of control aspects at many different levels. Future
quantum technologies will rely on integrated architectures
of hybrid quantum systems [
230] with e.g. nuclear spins for
long-term  storage,  quantum-nanomechanical  devices  for
sensing and photons  for  the  communication of quantum
states. This will require also the integration of quantum
mechanics in engineering education and vice versa. It will
be necessary to establish strong links of quantum control
experts to quantum engineering and to the manufacturing
of quantum devices.
Due to its interdisciplinary nature with applications in
many diverse fields, future advances in the optimal con-
trol of quantum systems will require the combined effort
of people with expertise in a wide range of research fields.
Only  the  close  link  of  basic  research,  development  and
applications will open scientifically and economically re-
warding perspectives and will foster the innovation poten-
tial of emerging quantum technologies in an optimal way.
The Virtual Facility for Quantum Control (VF-QC) under
the umbrella of the EU Coordinated Action for Quantum
Technologies in Europe (QUTE-EUROPE) marks an im-
portant  step  in  this  direction.  The  primary  goal  of  the
VF-QC is to provide a common structure for the growing
quantum control community in Europe, for the promotion
of quantum control and to provide expertise to other sci-
entific communities, to policy makers and the general pub-
lic. Establishing common terminology, common standards
and common visions are crucial prerequisites to maximize
the beneficial impact of optimal quantum control methods
on current and future technology, economics and society.
Acknowledgements
This strategic report has grown out of the Pan-European
Coordination and support action on Optimal Control of
Quantum  Systems  (QUAINT),  funded  by  the  European
Commission under grant number 297861. We would like to
thank all people who have participated in the community
consultation for their comments and suggestions. In par-
ticular we acknowledge contributions from Andreas Buch-
leitner,  Tobias  Brixner,  Daniel  Burgarth,  Enrico  Prati,
David Tannor, and Zdenˇek Toˇsner. We are indebted to Per
J. Liebermann for assisting the writing process as well as
Frank Langbein, Peter K. Schuhmacher and Andrea Du-
mont for managing the community consultation.
References
1.  The quaint website.  www.quantumcontrol.eu, 2015.
2.  A. Abragam.The Principles of Nuclear Magnetism.
Oxford University Press, 1961.
3.  Martin Aeschlimann, Michael Bauer, Daniela Bayer,
Tobias Brixner, F.  Javier Garc ́ıa de  Abajo,  Walter
Pfeiffer, Martin Rohmer, Christian Spindler, and Fe-
lix Steeb.  Adaptive subwavelength control of nano-
optical fields.Nature, 446:301–304, 2007.
4.  A.  A.  Agrachev  and  Y.  L.  Sachkov.Control the-
ory from the geometric viewpoint.   Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, vol. 87 of encyclopaedia of mathematical sci-
ences,  control  theory  and  optimization,  ii.  edition,
2004.
5.  F.  Albertini  and  D’Alessandro  D.   Notions  of  con-
trollability for bilinear multilevel quantum systems.
IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 48:1399–1403, 2003.
6.  F.  Albertini  and  D.  D’Alessandro.   Minimum  time
optimal synthesis for two level quantum systems.J.
Math. Phys., 56:012106, 2015.
7.  C.  Altafini  and  F.  Ticozzi.   Modeling  and  control
of quantum systems: An introduction.IEEE Trans.
Automat. Control, 57:1898–1917, 2012.
8.  Claudio  Altafini.    Controllability  of  quantum  me-
chanical  systems  by  root  space  decomposition  of
su(N).J. Math. Phys., 43(5):2051–2062, 2002.
9.  Claudio Altafini. Controllability properties for finite
dimensional  quantum  markovian master  equations.
J. Math. Phys., 44(6):2357–2372, 2003.
10.  Morag Am-Shallem  and  Ronnie  Kosloff.   The  scal-
ing  of  weak  field  phase-only  control  in  Markovian
dynamics.J. Chem. Phys., 141:044121, 2014.
11.  Saieswari  Amaran,  Ronnie  Kosloff,  Micha l  Tomza,
Robert Moszynski, Leonid Rybak, Liat Levin, Zohar
Amitay, J. Martin Berglund, Daniel M.  Reich, and
Christiane P. Koch.  Femtosecond two-photon pho-
toassociation of hot magnesium atoms: A quantum
dynamical study using thermal random phase wave-
functions.J. Chem. Phys., 139:164124, 2013.
12.  Ori  Katz  andEran  Small  and  Yaron  Silberberg.
Looking around corners and through thin turbid lay-
ers in real time with scattered incoherent light.Na-
ture Photon., 6:549–553, 2012.
13.  B.  E.  Anderson,  H.  Sosa-Martinez,  C.  A.  Riofr ́ıo,
Ivan H. Deutsch, and Poul S. Jessen.  Accurate and
robust unitary transformations of a high-dimensional
quantum system.Phys. Rev. Lett., 114(24):240401,
2015.
14.  M.  Annunziato  and  A.  Borzi.   Optimal  control  of
probability density functions of stochastic processes.
Math. Modelling Anal., 15(4):393–407, 2010.
15.  E. Ass ́emat, L.  Attar, M.  J.  Penouilh, M.  Picquet,
A.  Tabard,  Y.  Zhang,  S.  J.  Glaser,  and  D.  Sugny.
Optimal control of the inversion of two spins in nu-
clear magnetic resonance.Chem. Phys., 405:71–75,
2012.
16.  E. Ass ́emat, M. Lapert, Y. Zhang, M. Braun, S. J.
Glaser,  and  D.  Sugny.   Simultaneous  time-optimal
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control17
control of the inversion of two spin-
1
2
particles.Phys.
Rev. A, 82(1):013415, 2010.
17.  David Avisar and David J. Tannor. Complete recon-
struction of the wave function of a reacting molecule
by four-wave mixing spectroscopy.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
106(17):170405, 2011.
18.  David   Avisar   and   David   J.   Tannor.Multi-
dimensional wavepacket and potential reconstruction
by  resonant  coherent  anti-stokes  raman  scattering:
Application  to  H2O  and  HOD.J. Chem. Phys.,
136(21):214107, 2012.
19.  D. D. Awschalom, L. C. Bassett, A. S. Dzurak, E. L.
Hu, and J. R. Petta. Quantum spintronics: Engineer-
ing and manipulating atom-like spins in semiconduc-
tors.Science, 339:1174–1179, 2013.
20.  Yue Ban, Xi Chen, E. Ya Sherman, and J. G. Muga.
Fast and robust spin manipulation in a quantum dot
by electric fields.Phys. Rev. Lett., 109(20):206602,
2012.
21.  R.   Barends,   J.   Kelly,   A.   Megrant,   A.   Veitia,
D.  Sank,  E.  Jeffrey,  T.  C.  White,  J.  Mutus,  A.  G.
Fowler, B. Campbell, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro,
A.  Dunsworth,  C.  Neill,  P.  O’Malley,  P.  Roushan,
A.  Vainsencher, J.  Wenner,  A.  N.  Korotkov, A.  N.
Cleland, and J. M. Martinis.  Logic gates at the sur-
face code threshold: Superconducting qubits poised
for   fault-tolerant   quantum   computing.Nature,
508:500–503, 2014.
22.  A.  Bartana,  R.  Kosloff,  and  D.  J.  Tannor.   Laser
cooling of internal degrees of freedom. II.J. Chem.
Phys., 106:1435–1448, 1997.
23.  Allon Bartana, Ronnie Kosloff, and David J Tannor.
Laser  cooling  of  molecules  by  dynamically  trapped
states.Chem. Phys., 267(1–3):195–207, 2001.
24.  T.    Bayer,    M.    Wollenhaupt,    H.    Braun,    and
T.  Baumert.   Ultrafast  and  efficient  control  of  co-
herent electron dynamics via SPODS.Adv. Chem.
Phys., page 1, 2014.
25.  T.  Bayer, M.  Wollenhaupt,  C.  Sarpe-Tudoran, and
T.  Baumert.   Robust  photon  locking.Phys. Rev.
Lett., 102(2):023004, 2009.
26.  Tim Bayer, Hendrike Braun, Cristian Sarpe, Robert
Siemering,  Philipp  von  den  Hoff,  Regina  de  Vivie-
Riedle,  Thomas  Baumert,  and  Matthias  Wollen-
haupt.   Charge  oscillation  controlled  molecular  ex-
citation.Phys. Rev. Lett., 110(12):123003, 2013.
27.  K.   Beauchard.Local   controllability   of   a   1-
D  Schr ̈odinger  equation.J. Math. Pures Appl.,
84(7):851–956, 2005.
28.  Karine  Beauchard,  Jean-Michel  Coron,  and  Pierre
Rouchon.Controllability  issues  for   continuous-
spectrum  systems  and  ensemble  controllability  of
Bloch equations.Commun. Math. Phys., 296(2):525–
557, 2010.
29.  C. H. Bennett, I. Cirac, M. S. Leifer, D. W. Leung,
N. Linden, S. Popescu, and G. Vidal. Optimal simu-
lation of two-qubit Hamiltonians using general local
operations.Phys. Rev. A, 66(1):012305, 2002.
30.  V.  Bergholm  and  T.  Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen.How
to    transfer    between    arbitrary    n-qubit    quan-
tum   states   by   coherent   control   and   simplest
switchable   noise   on   a   single   qubit.e-print:
http://arXiv.org/pdf/1206.494, 2012.
31.  K. Bergmann, H. Theuer, and B. W. Shore. Coherent
population transfer among quantum states of atoms
and  molecules.Rev. Mod. Phys.,  70(3):1003–1025,
1998.
32.  M. A. Bernstein, K. F. King, and Zhou.Handbook
of MRI Pulse Sequences.   Elsevier,  Burlington-San
Diego-London, 2004.
33.  Timothy   Bohinski,   Katharine   Moore   Tibbetts,
Maryam Tarazkar, Dmitri  A.  Romanov, Spiridoula
Matsika, and Robert J. Levis. Strong field adiabatic
ionization prepares a launch state for coherent con-
trol.J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 5(24):4305–4309, 2014.
34.  B. Bonnard and M. Chyba.Singular trajectories and
their role in control theory.  Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
mathematics and applications, vol. 40 edition, 2003.
35.  B. Bonnard, M. Chyba, and D. Sugny. Time-minimal
control  of  dissipative  two-level  quantum  systems:
The  generic  case.IEEE Trans. Automat. Control,
54(11):2598–2610, 2009.
36.  B.Bonnard,O.Cots,J.-B.Pomet,and
N.   Shcherbakova.Riemannian   metrics   on   2D-
manifolds  related  to  the  Euler-Poinsot  rigid  body
motion.ESAIM  Control  Optim.  Calc.  Var.,
20(3):864–893, 2014.
37.  B.   Bonnard,   O.   Cots,   and   N.   Shcherbakova.
The  Serret-Andoyer Riemannian  metric and  Euler-
Poinsot  rigid  body  motion.Math. Control Relat.
Fields, 3(3):287–302, 2013.
38.  A.  D.  Boozer.Time-optimal  synthesis  of  SU(2)
transformations for a spin-
1
2
system.Phys. Rev. A,
85(1):013409, 2012.
39.  T. W. Borneman, M. D. H ̈urlimann, and D. G. Cory.
Application of optimal control to CPMG refocusing
pulse design.J. Magn. Reson., 207(2):220–233, 2010.
40.  A. Borzi. Quantum optimal control using the adjoint
method.Nanoscale Syst. Math. Model. Theory Appl.,
1:93–111, 2012.
41.  U.  Boscain,  T.  Chambrion,  and  G.  Charlot.   Non-
isotropic  3-level  quantum  systems:  Complete  solu-
tions for minimum time and minimum energy.Dis-
crete Contin. Dyn. Syst. Ser. B, 5(4):957–990, 2005.
42.  U.  Boscain,  G.  Charlot,  J.-P.  Gauthier,  S.  Gu ́erin,
and H.-R. Jauslin.  Optimal control in laser-induced
population transfer for two- and three-level quantum
systems.J. Math. Phys., 43:2107–2132, 2002.
43.  U. Boscain and P. Mason. Time minimal trajectories
for a spin 1/2 particle in a magnetic field.J. Math.
Phys., 47(6):062101, 2006.
44.  U.  Boscain  and  B.  Piccoli.Optimal Synthesis for
Control Systems on 2-D Manifolds.  Springer, smai,
vol. 43 edition, 2004.
45.  S.   Bose.Quantum   communication  through  an
unmodulated   spin   chain.Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,
91(20):207901, 2003.
18Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
46.  Luc Bouten, Ramon. van Handel, and Matthew R.
James. An introduction to quantum filtering.SIAM
J. Control Optim., 46(6):2199, 2007.
47.  Luc  Bouten,  Ramon  van  Handel,  and  Matthew  R.
James. A discrete invitation to quantum filtering and
feedback control.SIAM Rev., 51(2):239–316, 2009.
48.  C.  R.  Bowers  and  D.  P.  Weitekamp.   Transforma-
tion of symmetrization order to nuclear-spin magne-
tization by chemical reaction and nuclear magnetic
resonance.Phys. Rev. Lett., 57(21):2645–2648, 1986.
49.  F.    R.    Braakman,    P.    Barthelmy,    C.    Reichl,
W.   Wegscheider,   and   L.   M.   K.   Vandersypen.
Long-distance  coherent  coupling  in  a  quantum  dot
array.Nat. Nanotechnol., 8:432–437, 2013.
50.  M. Braun and S. J. Glaser.  Cooperative pulses.J.
Magn. Reson, 207(1):114–123, 2010.
51.  M. Braun and S. J. Glaser.  Concurrently optimized
cooperative  pulses  in  robust  quantum  control:  Ap-
plication to broadband Ramsey-type pulse sequence
elements.New J. Phys., 16:115002, 2014.
52.  Christian    Bretschneider,   Alexander    Karabanov,
Niels Chr. Nielsen, and Walter K ̈ockenberger.  Con-
version  of  parahydrogen  induced  longitudinal  two-
spin order to evenly distributed single spin polarisa-
tion  by  optimal  control pulse  sequences.J. Chem.
Phys., 136(9):094201, 2012.
53.  Heinz-Peter Breuer, Elsi-Mari Laine, and Jyrki Piilo.
Measure for the degree of non-markovian behavior of
quantum processes in open systems.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103:210401, Nov 2009.
54.  Constantin Brif, Raj Chakrabarti, and Herschel Ra-
bitz.  Control of quantum phenomena: Past, present
and future.New J. Phys., 12(7):075008, 2010.
55.  Tobias Brixner and Gustav Gerber.  Quantum con-
trol  of  gas-phase  and  liquid-phase  femtochemistry.
Chem. Phys. Chem., 4(5):418–438, 2003.
56.  R. W. Brockett.  System theory on group manifolds
and coset spaces.SIAM J. Control, 10(2):265–284,
1972.
57.  R. W. Brockett.  Lie theory and control systems de-
fined on spheres.SIAM J. Appl. Math., 25(2):213–
225, 1973.
58.  P.  Brumer  and  M.  Shapiro.Principles and Appli-
cations of the Quantum Control of Molecular Pro-
cesses.  Wiley Interscience, 2003.
59.  Paul Brumer, Kunihito Hoki, and Michael Spanner.
An analysis of two liquid-state adaptive feedback ex-
periments.Isr. J. Chem., 47(1):111–114, 2007.
60.  Paul Brumer and Moshe Shapiro. One photon mode
selective control of reactions by rapid or shaped laser
pulses: An emperor without clothes?Chem. Phys.,
139(1):221–228, 1989.
61.  A. Bryson and Y. C. Ho.Applied Optimal Control.
Hemisphere, New-York, 1975.
62.  H. P. B ̈uchler, S. Diehl, A. Kantian, A. Micheli, and
P. Zoller.  Preparation of entangled states by quan-
tum Markov processes.Phys. Rev. A, 78(4):042307,
2008.
63.  D.    K.    Burgarth,    P.    Facchi,    V.Giovanetti,
H.  Nakazato,  S.  Pascazio,  and  K.  Yuasa.Ex-
ponential rise of dynamical complexity in quantum
computing  through  projections.Nat. Commun.,
5:5173, 2014.
64.  Daniel Burgarth, Koji Maruyama, Michael Murphy,
Simone Montangero, Tommaso Calarco, Franco Nori,
and Martin B. Plenio.  Scalable quantum computa-
tion via local control of only two qubits.Phys. Rev.
A, 81(4):040303, 2010.
65.  V. Buzek, M. Hillery, M. Ziman, and M. Rosko. Pro-
grammable quantum processors.Quant. Inf. Proc.,
5:313–420, 2006.
66.  J.-M. Cai, B. Naydenov, R. Pfeiffer, L. P. McGuin-
ness,  K.  D.  Jahnke,  F.  Jelezko,  M.  B.  Plenio,  and
A.  Retzker.Robust  dynamical  decoupling  with
concatenated  continuous  driving.New J. Phys.,
14(11):113023, 2012.
67.  T. Calarco, U. Dorner, P. S. Julienne, C. J. Williams,
and P. Zoller. Quantum computations with atoms in
optical lattices: Marker qubits and molecular inter-
actions.Phys. Rev. A, 70(1):012306, 2004.
68.  T. Caneva, M. Murphy, T. Calarco, R. Fazio, S. Mon-
tangero, V. Giovannetti, and G. E. Santoro. Optimal
control at the quantum speed limit.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103(24):240501, 2009.
69.  Tommaso  Caneva,  Tommaso  Calarco,  and  Simone
Montangero.  Chopped random-basis quantum opti-
mization.Phys. Rev. A, 84(2):022326, 2011.
70.  Tommaso  Caneva,  Tommaso  Calarco,  and  Simone
Montangero.   Entanglement-storage  units.New J.
Phys., 14(9):093041, 2012.
71.  A. Carlini, A. Hosoya, T. Koike, and Y. Okudaira.
Time-optimal quantum evolution.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
96(6):060503, 2006.
72.  A.  Carlini,  A.  Hosoya,  T.  Koike,  and  Y.  Oku-
daira.  Time-optimal CNOT between indirectly cou-
pled  qubits  in  a  linear  Ising  chain.J. Phys. A,
44(14):145302, 2011.
73.  A.  Carlini and T.  Koike.  Time-optimal transfer  of
coherence.Phys. Rev. A, 86(5):054302, 2012.
74.  A. Carlini and T. Koike.  Time-optimal unitary op-
erations in Ising chains: unequal couplings and fixed
fidelity.J. Phys. A, 46(4):045307, 2013.
75.  R.  Chakrabarti  and  H.  Rabitz.   Quantum  control
landscapes.Int. Rev. Phys. Chem.,  26(4):671–735,
2007.
76.  Thomas Chambrion, Paolo Mason, Mario Sigalotti,
and  Ugo  Boscain.   Controllability  of  the  discrete-
spectrum schr ̈odinger equation driven by an external
field.Ann. I. H. Poincare-An., 26(1):329–349, 2009.
77.  Xi  Chen,  I.  Lizuain,  A.  Ruschhaupt,  D.  Gu ́ery-
Odelin, and J. G. Muga.  Shortcut to adiabatic pas-
sage in two- and three-level atoms.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
105(12):123003, 2010.
78.  J. M. Chow, L. DiCarlo, J. M. Gambetta, F. Motzoi,
L. Frunzio, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf.  Op-
timized  driving  of  superconducting  artificial  atoms
for  improved  single-qubit  gates.Phys. Rev. A,
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control19
82(4):040305, 2010.
79.  G. Ciaramella, A. Borz`ı, G. Dirr, and D. Wachsmuth.
Newton  methods  for  the  optimal  control  of  closed
quantum  spin  systems.SIAM J. Sci. Comput.,
37:A319–A346, 2015.
80.  J. Clarke and F. K. Wilhelm. Superconducting quan-
tum bits.Nature, 453:1031–1042, 2008.
81.  Joshua  Combes  and  Kurt  Jacobs.   Rapid  state  re-
duction of quantum systems using feedback control.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 96(1):010504, 2006.
82.  Joshua Combes, Howard M. Wiseman, and Kurt Ja-
cobs. Rapid measurement of quantum systems using
feedback control.Phys. Rev. Lett., 100(16):160503,
2008.
83.  S. Cong.Control of Quantum Systems: Theory and
Methods.  Wiley & Sons, Singapore, 2014.
84.  S. Conolly, D. Nishimura, and A. Macovski. Optimal
control methods in NMR spectroscopy.IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging, MI-5:106–115, 1986.
85.  J.M.Coron.Control  and  Nonlinearity.
Am. Math. Soc., Providence RI, 2007.
86.  Francois   Courvoisier,   Luigi   Bonacina,   Veronique
Boutou, Laurent Guyon, Christophe Bonnet, Benoit
Thuillier,  Jerome Extermann,  Matthias  Roth,  Her-
schel  Rabitz,  and  Jean-Pierre  Wolf.   Identification
of biological microparticles using ultrafast depletion
spectroscopy.Faraday Discuss., 137(0):37–49, 2008.
87.  M. Cozzini, T. Calarco, A. Recati, and P. Zoller. Fast
Rydberg gates without dipole blockade via quantum
control.Opt. Commun., 264(2):375–384, 2006.
88.  Andrew  W.  Cross  and  Jay  M.  Gambetta.    Opti-
mized  pulse  shapes  for  a  resonator-induced  phase
gate.Phys. Rev. A, 91(3):032325, 2015.
89.  Johanna M Dela Cruz, Igor Pastirk, Matthew Com-
stock, Vadim V Lozovoy, and Marcos Dantus.  Use
of coherent control methods through scattering bio-
logical tissue to achieve functional imaging.P. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 101(49):16996–17001, 2004.
90.  D. Daems, A. Ruschhaupt, D. Sugny, and S. Gu ́erin.
Robust  quantum  control  by  a  single-shot  shaped
pulse.Phys. Rev. Lett., 111:050404, 2013.
91.  D. D’Alessandro.Introduction to Quantum Control
and Dynamics. Chapman and Hall, Boca Raton, ap-
plied mathematics and nonlinear science series edi-
tion, 2008.
92.  D. D’Alessandro and M. Dahled. Optimal control of
two-level quantum systems.IEEE Trans. Automat.
Control, 46(6):866–876, 2001.
93.  Chantal Daniel, J ̈urgen Full, Leticia Gonz ́alez, Cos-
min Lupulescu, J ̈orn Manz, Andrea Merli,
ˇ
Stefan Va-
jda, and Ludger W ̈oste. Deciphering the reaction dy-
namics underlying optimal control laser fields.Sci-
ence, 299:536–539, 2003.
94.  M. Dantus and V. V. Lozovoy. Experimental coher-
ent laser control of physicochemical processes.Chem.
Rev., 104(4):1813–1860, 2004.
95.  Johann  G.  Danzl,  Elmar  Haller,  Mattias  Gustavs-
son, Manfred J. Mark, Russell Hart, Nadia Bouloufa,
Olivier Dulieu, Helmut Ritsch, and Hanns-Christoph
N ̈agerl.  Quantum gas of deeply bound ground state
molecules.Science, 321:1062–1066, 2008.
96.  G.  De  Chiara,  T.  Calarco,  M.  Anderlini,  S.  Mon-
tangero,  P.  J.  Lee,  B.  L.  Brown,  W.  D.  Phillips,
and J. V. Porto.  Optimal control of atom transport
for quantum gates in optical lattices.Phys. Rev. A,
77(5):052333, 2008.
97.  P.   de   Fouquieres  and   S.   G.   Schirmer.Quan-
tum  control  landscapes:  A  closer  look.Infinite di-
mensional analysis, quantum probability and related
topic, 16:1350021, 2013.
98.  P de Fouquieres, S. G. Schirmer, S. J. Glaser, and
Ilya  Kuprov.    Second  order  gradient  ascent  pulse
engineering.J. Magn. Reson.,  212(2):412–417, oct
2011.
99.  Anatoly E. Dementyev, David G.  Cory, and Chan-
drasekhar Ramanathan.  Rapid  diffusion  of dipolar
order enhances dynamic nuclear polarization.Phys.
Rev. B, 77(2):024413, 2008.
100.  M. Devoret.Quantum Machines: Measurement and
Control of Engineered Quantum Systems.
 ́
Ecole de
Physique des Houches 2011. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2014.
101.  G. Dirr and U. Helmke. Lie theory for quantum con-
trol.GAMM-Mitt., 31(1):59–93, 2008.
102.  G. Dirr, U. Helmke, I. Kurniawan, and T. Schulte-
Herbr ̈uggen.Lie-semigroup  structures  for  reach-
ability   and   control   of   open   quantum   systems:
Kossakowski-Lindblad generators form Lie wedge to
Markovian channels.Rep. Math. Phys., 64(1–2):93–
121, 2009.
103.  Hauke  Doerk,  Zbigniew  Idziaszek,  and  Tommaso
Calarco.   Atom-ion  quantum  gate.Phys. Rev. A,
81(1):012708, 2010.
104.  Andrew  C.  Doherty,  Salman  Habib,  Kurt  Jacobs,
Hideo  Mabuchi,  and  Sze  M.  Tan.   Quantum  feed-
back control and classical control theory.Phys. Rev.
A, 62(1):012105, 2000.
105.  F. Dolde, V. Bergholm, Y. Wang, I. Jakobi, B. Nay-
denov,  S.  Pezzagna,  J.  Meijer,  F.  Jelezko,  P.  Neu-
mann,  T.  Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen,  J.  Biamonte,  and
J. Wrachtrup. High-fidelity spin entanglement using
optimal control.Nat. Commun., 5:3371, 2014.
106.  D. Dong and I. A. Petersen. Quantum control theory
and applications: A survey.IET Control Theory A.,
4(12):2651–2671, 2010.
107.  Patrick Doria, Tommaso Calarco, and Simone Mon-
tangero.  Optimal control technique for many-body
quantum  dynamics.Phys. Rev. Lett.,  106:190501,
2011.
108.  U  Dorner,  T  Calarco,  P  Zoller,  and  P  Grangier.
Quantum  logic  via  optimal  control  in  holographic
dipole traps.J. Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt.,
7(10):S341, 2005.
109.  J. P. Dowling and G. Milburn. Quantum technology:
The second quantum revolution.Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. A, 361:1655–1674, 2003.
110.  Nirit  Dudovich,  Dan  Oron,  and  Yaron  Silberberg.
Single-pulse coherently controlled nonlinear Raman
20Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
spectroscopy and microscopy.Nature, 418:512–514,
2002.
111.  Luke J. Edwards, D. V. Savostyanov, Z. T. Welder-
ufael, Donghan Lee, and Ilya Kuprov. Quantum me-
chanical NMR simulation algorithm for protein-size
spin systems.J. Magn. Reson., 243:107–113, 2014.
112.  D. J. Egger and F. K. Wilhelm. Adaptive hybrid op-
timal quantum control for imprecisely characterized
systems.Phys. Rev. Lett., 112:240503, 2014.
113.  D. J. Egger and F. K. Wilhelm.  Optimal control of
a quantum measurement.Phys. Rev. A, 90:052331,
2014.
114.  D.   J.   Egger   and   F.   K.   Wilhelm.Optimized
controlled-Z  gates  for  two  superconducting  qubits
coupled through a resonator.Supercond. Sci. Tech-
nol., 27:014001, 2014.
115.  S. Ehni.Optimal Control in High Resolution NMR
Spectroscopy: Transfer Elements and their Applica-
tion for Structure Elucidation.   Dissertation,  Karl-
sruhe, 2013.
116.  Sebastian  Ehni  and  Burkhard  Luy.    BEBEtr  and
BUBI: J-compensated concurrent shaped pulses for
H-1-C-13 experiments.J. Magn. Reson.,  232:7–17,
2013.
117.  Sebastian Ehni and Burkhard Luy.  Robust INEPT
and refocused INEPT transfer with compensation of
a wide range of couplings, offsets, and B-1-field inho-
mogeneities (cob3).J. Magn. Reson., 247:111–117,
2014.
118.  Reuven  Eitan,  Michael  Mundt,  and  David  J.  Tan-
nor.  Optimal control with accelerated convergence:
Combining the Krotov and quasi-Newton methods.
Phys. Rev. A, 83(5):053426, 2011.
119.  D. Elliott.Bilinear Control Systems: Matrices in Ac-
tion.  Springer, London, 2009.
120.  Clive  Emary  and  John  Gough.Coherent  feed-
back  control in  quantum  transport.Phys. Rev. B,
90(20):205436, 2014.
121.  Volker Engel, Christoph Meier, and David J. Tannor.
Local Control Theory: Recent Applications to Energy
and Particle Transfer Processes in Molecules, volume
141, pages 29–101. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., feb 2009.
122.  L.  Englert,  M.  Wollenhaupt,  L.  Haag,  C.  Sarpe-
Tudoran,  B.  Rethfeld,  and  T.  Baumert.   Material
processing of dielectrics with temporally asymmetric
shaped  femtosecond  laser  pulses  on  the  nanometer
scale.Appl. Phys. A, 92(4):749–753, 2008.
123.  Andreas Enthart, J. Christoph Freudenberger, Julien
Furrer,  Horst  Kessler,  and  Burkhard  Luy.The
CLIP/CLAP-HSQC: Pure absorptive spectra for the
measurement of one-bond couplings.J. Magn. Re-
son., 192(2):314–322, 2008.
124.  Richard R Ernst. Nuclear magnetic resonance fourier
transform spectroscopy (nobel lecture).Angewandte
Chemie International Edition in English, 31(7):805–
823, 1992.
125.  Richard   R   Ernst,   Geoffrey   Bodenhausen,   and
Alexander Wokaun.Principles of nuclear magnetic
resonance in one and two dimensions,  volume  14.
Clarendon Press Oxford, 1987.
126.  E.   Ferraro,  M.   De   Michielis,   M.   Fanciulli,   and
E.  Prati.   Coherent  tunneling  by  adiabatic  passage
of an exchange-only spin qubit in a double quantum
dot chain.Phys. Rev. B, 91(7):075435, 2015.
127.  R.  Fisher,  H.  Yuan,  A.  Sp ̈orl,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.
Timeoptimal generation of cluster states.Phys. Rev.
A, 79:042304, 2009.
128.  Frederik F. Floether, Pierre de Fouquieres, and So-
phie G.  Schirmer.  Robust  quantum gates for  open
systems via optimal control: Markovian versus non-
markovian dynamics.New J. Phys.,  14:073023, jul
2012.
129.  A.  G.  Fowler and  J. M.  Martinis.  Quantifying the
effects of local many-qubit errors and non-local two-
qubit  errors  on  the  surface  code.Phys. Rev. A,
89:032316, 2014.
130.  R. Freeman.  Selective excitation in high-resolution
NMR.Chem. Rev., 91:1397–1312, 1991.
131.  R. Freeman.  Shaped radiofrequency pulses in  high
resolution  NMR.Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spec-
trosc., 32:59–106, 1998.
132.  R.  Freeman  and  X.  Wu.   Design  of  magnetic  reso-
nance  experiments  by  genetic  evolution.J. Magn.
Reson., 75:184–189, 1987.
133.  Hadas Frostig, Tim Bayer, Nirit Dudovich, Yonina C
Eldar, and Yaron Silberberg. Single-beam spectrally
controlled two-dimensional raman spectroscopy.Na-
ture Photon., 9:339–343, 2015.
134.  H. A. F ̈urst, M. H. Goerz, U. G. Poschinger, M. Mur-
phy, S. Montangero, T. Calarco, F.  Schmidt-Kaler,
K.  Singer,  and  C.  P.  Koch.   Controlling the  trans-
port  of  an  ion:  Classical  and  quantum  mechan-
ical  solutions.New J. Phys.,   16:075007,  2014.
arXiv:1312.4156.
135.  A. Garon, S. J. Glaser, and D. Sugny. Time-optimal
control of SU(2) quantum operations.Phys. Rev. A,
88:043422, 2013.
136.  A.  Garon,  R.  Zeier,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.   Visualizing
operators of  coupled  spins  systems.Phys. Rev. A,
91:042122/1–28, 2015.
137.  Matson G.B.  An integrated program for amplitude-
modulated rf pulse generation and re-mapping with
shaped gradients.Magn. Reson. Imaging, 12:1205–
1225, 1994.
138.  Naum I. Gershenzon, Kyryl Kobzar, Burkhard Luy,
Steffen J. Glaser, and Thomas E. Skinner.  Optimal
control design of excitation pulses that accommodate
relaxation.J. Magn. Reson., 188(2):330–336, 2007.
139.  Naum  I.  Gershenzon,  Thomas  E.  Skinner,  Bern-
hard Brutscher, Navin Khaneja, Manoj Nimbalkar,
Burkhard Luy, and Steffen J. Glaser.  Linear phase
slope in pulse design: Application to coherence trans-
fer.J. Magn. Reson., 192(2):235–243, 2008.
140.  S. J. Glaser and G. Drobny. The tailored TOCSY ex-
periment: Chemical shift selective coherence transfer.
Chem. Phys. Lett., 164:456–462, 1989.
141.  S.  J.  Glaser  and  G.  P.  Drobny.    Assessment  and
optimization  of  pulse  sequences  for  homonuclear
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control21
isotropic mixing.Advances in Magnetic Resonance,
W.S. Warren, Ed., 14:35–58, 1990.
142.  M. H. Goerz, G. Gualdi, D. M. Reich, C. P. Koch,
F.  Motzoi,  K.  B.  Whaley,  J.  Vala,  M.  M.  M ̈uller,
S. Montangero, and T. Calarco. Optimizing for an ar-
bitrary perfect entangler. ii. application.Phys. Rev.
A, 91, 2015.  arXiv:1412.7350.
143.  Michael  H.  Goerz,  Tommaso  Calarco,  and  Chris-
tiane P. Koch.  The quantum speed limit of optimal
controlled phasegates for trapped neutral atoms.J.
Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 44:154011, jul 2011.
144.  Michael  H.  Goerz,  Eli  J.  Halperin,  Jon  M.  Aytac,
Christiane P. Koch, and K. Birgitta Whaley. Robust-
ness  of  high-fidelity  rydberg  gates  with  single-site
addressability.Phys. Rev. A,  90:032329, sep  2014.
arXiv:1401.1858.
145.  Michael  H.  Goerz,  Daniel  M.  Reich,  and  Chris-
tiane P. Koch.  Optimal control theory for a unitary
operation under dissipative evolution.New J. Phys.,
16:055012, may 2014.  arXiv:1310.2271.
146.  Caroline  Gollub,  Markus  Kowalewski,  and  Regina
de Vivie-Riedle. Monotonic convergent optimal con-
trol theory with strict limitations on the spectrum of
optimized laser fields.Phys. Rev. Lett., 101:073002,
2008.
147.  R. J. Gordon and S. A. Rice.  Active control of the
dynamics of atoms and molecules.Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem., 48:601, 1997.
148.  Alexey V. Gorshkov, Tommaso Calarco, Mikhail D.
Lukin, and Anders S. Sørensen.  Photon storage in
Λ-type optically dense atomic media. iv. optimal con-
trol using gradient ascent.Phys. Rev. A, 77:043806,
2008.
149.  J. E. Gough and S. Wildfeuer. Enhancement of field
squeezing  using  coherent  feedback.Phys. Rev. A,
80:042107, oct 2009.
150.  Matthew D. Grace, Jason Dominy, Robert L. Kosut,
Constantin Brif, and Herschel Rabitz. Environment-
invariant  measure  of  distance  between  evolutions
of   an   open   quantum   system.New J. Phys.,
12(1):015001, jan 2010.
151.  Loren  Greenman,  Christiane  P.  Koch,  and  K.  Bir-
gitta Whaley.  Laser pulses for coherent xuv raman
excitation.Phys. Rev. A, 92:in press, 2015.
152.  Andrew D. Greentree, Jared H. Cole, A. R. Hamil-
ton, and Lloyd C. L. Hollenberg. Coherent electronic
transfer in quantum dot systems using adiabatic pas-
sage.Phys. Rev. B, 70(23):235317, 2004.
153.  C.  Griesinger, M.  Bennati,  H.  M.  Vieth,  C.  Luchi-
nat,  G.  Parigi,  P.  H ̈ofer,  F.  Engelke,  S.  J.  Glaser,
V. Denysenkov, and T. F. Prisner. Dynamic nuclear
polarization at high magnetic fields in liquids.Prog.
NMR Spectrosc., 64:4–28, 2012.
154.  W. A. Grissom, D. Xu, A. B. Kerr, and J. A. Fessler.
Fast  large-tip-angle  multidimensional  and  parallel
RF pulse design in MRI.IEEE Trans. Med. Imag.,
28:1548–1559, 2009.
155.  Julian  Grond,  J ̈org  Schmiedmayer,  and  Ulrich  Ho-
henester.  Optimizing number squeezing when split-
ting   a   mesoscopic   condensate.Phys. Rev. A,
79:021603, 2009.
156.  P.  Gross,  D.  Neuhauser,  and  H.  Rabitz.   Optimal
control of  curve-crossing systems.J. Chem. Phys.,
96(4):2834, 1992.
157.  Peter Gross and Marcos Dantus.  Femtosecond pho-
toassociation: Coherence and implications for control
in bimolecular reactions.J. Chem. Phys., 106:8013,
feb 1997.
158.  S.  Gu ́erin  and  H.  R.  Jauslin.Control of Quantum
Dynamics by Laser Pulses: Adiabatic Floquet Theory,
volume 125, pages 147–267. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2003.
159.  T.  H ̈aberle,  D.  Schmid-Lorch,  K.  Karrai,  F.  Rein-
hard, and J. Wrachtrup.  High-dynamic-range imag-
ing of nanoscale magnetic fields using optimal control
of a single qubit.Phys. Rev. Lett., 111:170801, 2013.
160.  U. Haeberlen.The Principles of Nuclear Magnetism.
Academic Press, New York, 1976.
161.  E.  L.  Hahn.   Spin  echoes.Phys. Rev.,  80:580–594,
1950.
162.  Peter Hamm and Martin Zanni.Concepts and meth-
ods of 2D infrared spectroscopy.  Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2011.
163.  K. Hammerer, G. Vidal, and J. I. Cirac.  Charateri-
zation of nonlocal gates.Phys. Rev. A, 66(6):062321,
2002.
164.  Anders  K.  Hansen,  Magnus  A.  Sørensen,  Peter  F.
Staanum, and Michael Drewsen. Single-ion recycling
reactions.Angewandte Chemie International Edi-
tion, 51(32):7960–7962, 2012.
165.  J. Herek, M. Wohlleben, X. Cogdell, X. Zeidler, and
M. Motzkus. Quantum control of energy flow in light
harvesting.Nature, 417:533, 2002.
166.  M. Hillery and V. Buzek.  Quantum machines.Con-
temp. Phys., 50:575–586, 2009.
167.  I.N. Hincks, C. Granade, T.W. Borneman, and D.G.
Cory.  Accounting for classical hardware in the con-
trol of quantum devices.arXiv:1409.8178 [quant-ph],
2014.
168.  J.  S.  Hodges,  J.  C.  Yang,  C.  Ramanathan,  and
D.  G.  Cory.   Universal  control of  nuclear  spins  via
anisotropic  hyperfine  interactions.Phys. Rev. A,
78:010303, Jul 2008.
169.  H. J. Hogben, M. Krzystyniak, G. T. P. Charnock,
P. J. Hore, and Ilya Kuprov.  Spinach – a software
library for simulation of spin dynamics in large spin
systems.J. Magn. Reson., 208(2):179–194, feb 2011.
170.  Ulrich Hohenester, Per Kristian Rekdal, Alfio Borz`ı,
and  J ̈org  Schmiedmayer.    Optimal  quantum  con-
trol of Bose-Einstein condensates in magnetic micro-
traps.Phys. Rev. A, 75:023602, 2007.
171.  M.  Z.  Hoque,  M.  Lapert,  E.  Hertz,  F.  Billard,
D. Sugny, B. Lavorel, and O. Faucher. Observation of
laser-induced field-free permanent planar alignment
of molecules.Phys. Rev. A, 84:013409, 2011.
172.  Y.  Hovav,  A.  Feintuch,  S.  Vega,  and  D.  Goldfarb.
Dynamic nuclear polarization using frequency mod-
ulation at 3.34 T.J. Magn. Reson., 238:94–105, 2014.
22Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
173.  S. Iida, M. Yukawa, H. Yonezawa, N. Yamamoto, and
A. Furusawa. Experimental demonstration of coher-
ent feedback control on optical field squeezing.IEEE
Trans. Automat. Control, 57(8):2045–2050, 2012.
174.  Mao J, Mareci TH, Scott KN, and Andrew ER.  Se-
lective  inversion  radiofrequency  pulses  by  optimal
control.J. Magn. Reson., 70:310–318, 1986.
175.  Mao J, Mareci TH, Scott KN, and Andrew ER. De-
sign of adiabatic selective pulses using optimal con-
trol theory.Magn. Reson. Med., 36:401–409, 1996.
176.  Georg J ̈ager and Ulrich Hohenester.  Optimal quan-
tum  control  of  Bose-Einstein  condensates  in  mag-
netic microtraps: Consideration of filter effects.Phys.
Rev. A, 88:035601, sep 2013.
177.  Georg  J ̈ager,  Daniel  M.  Reich,  Michael  H.  Goerz,
Christiane  P.  Koch,  and  Ulrich  Hohenester.   Opti-
mal  quantum  control  of  bose-einstein  condensates
in  magnetic  microtraps:  Comparison  of  gradient-
ascent-pulse-engineering   and   krotov   optimization
schemes.Phys. Rev. A, 90:033628, 2014.  1409.2976.
178.  M. R. James, H. I. Nurdin, and I. R. Petersen.h
∞
control of linear quantum stochastic systems.IEEE
Trans. Automat. Control, 53(8):1787–1803, sep 2008.
179.  M. A. Janich, M. A. McLean, R. Noeske, S. J. Glaser,
and R. F. Schulte. Slice-selective broadband refocus-
ing pulses for the robust generation of crushed spin-
echoes.J. Magn. Reson., 223:129–137, 2012.
180.  M. A. Janich, R. F. Schulte, M. Schwaiger, and S. J.
Glaser.  Robust slice-selective broadband refocusing
pulses.J. Magn. Reson., 213:126–135, 2011.
181.  F. Jelezko, T. Gaebel, I. Popa, M. Domhan, A. Gru-
ber, and J. Wrachtrup.  Observation of coherent os-
cillation  of  a  single  nuclear  spin  and  realization  of
a  two-qubit  conditional  quantum  gate.Phys. Rev.
Lett., 93(13):130501, 2004.
182.  F.  Jelezko  and  J.  Wrachtrup.    Single  defect  cen-
tres  in  diamond:  A  review.Phys. Status Solidi A,
203(13):3207–3225, 2006.
183.  H. Jirari, F.W.J. Hekking, and O. Buisson. Optimal
control of superconducting n-level quantum systems.
Europhys. Lett., 87:28004, 2009.
184.  J. R. Johansson, P. D. Nation, and F. Nori. Qutip 2:
A python framework for the dynamics of open quan-
tum systems.Comp. Phys. Comm., 184:1234, 2013.
185.  J. A. Jones.  Quantum computing with nmr.Prog.
NMR Spectrosc., 59:91–120, 2011.
186.  Alain  Joye.General  adiabatic  evolution  with  a
gap  condition.Communications in Mathematical
Physics, 275(1):139–162, 2007.
187.  Richard  S.  Judson  and  Herschel  Rabitz.Teach-
ing  lasers  to  control  molecules.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
68(10):1500–1503, 1992.
188.  V. Jurdjevic.Geometric Control Theory. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, Cambridge, 1997.
189.  V. Jurdjevic and H. Sussmann.  Control systems on
lie groups.Journal of Differential Equations, 12:313–
329, sep 1972.
190.  S. Kallush and R. Kosloff. Quantum governor: Auto-
matic quantum control and reduction of the influence
of noise without measuring.Phys. Rev. A, 73:032324,
2006.
191.  R.  Kalman,  P.  L.  Falb,  and  M.  A.  Arbib.Topics
in Mathematical System Theory.  McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1969.
192.  R. E. Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and
prediction problems.J. Basic Engineering, 82:35–45,
1960.
193.  Hiroyuki Katsuki, Hisashi  Chiba,  Bertrand Girard,
Christoph Meier, and Kenji Ohmori.  Visualizing pi-
cometric  quantum  ripples  of  ultrafast  wave-packet
interference.Science, 311(5767):1589–1592, 2006.
194.  Gil Katz, Mark A. Ratner, and Ronnie Kosloff. Con-
trol by decoherence: weak field control of an excited
state objective.New J. Phys., 12(1):015003, 2010.
195.  Ori Katz, Eran Small, Yaron Bromberg, and Yaron
Silberberg.  Focusing and compression of ultrashort
pulses  through  scattering  media.Nature Photon.,
5:372–377, 2011.
196.  T.  Kaufmann,  J.  M.  Franck,  T.  J.  Keller,  R.  P.
Barnes,  S.  J.  Glaser,  J.  M.  Martinis,  and  S.  Han.
DAC-board  based  X-band  EPR  spectrometer  with
arbitrary   waveform   control.J. Magn. Reson.,
235:95–108, 2013.
197.  E. Kawakami, P. Scarlino, D. R. Ward, F. R. Braak-
man,  D.  E.  Savage,  M.  G.  Lagally,  and  L.  M.  K.
Vandersypen.  Electrical control of a long-lived spin
qubit in a Si/SiGe quantum dot.Nat. Nanotechnol.,
9:666–670, 2014.
198.  C. Kehlet, A. C. Sivertsen, M. Bjerring, T. O. Reiss,
N.  Khaneja,  S.  J.  Glaser,  and  N.  C.  Nielsen.   Im-
proving solid-state nmr  dipolar  recoupling by  opti-
mal control.J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126:10202–10203,
2004.
199.  J. Kelly, R. Barends, B. Campbell, Y. Chen, Z. Chen,
B.   Chiaro,   A.   Dunsworth,   A.   G.   Fowler,   I.-C.
Hoi,  E.  Jeffrey,  A.  Megrant,  J.  Mutus,  C.  Neill,
P. J. J. O’Malley, C. Quintana, P. Roushan, D. Sank,
A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. C. White, A. N. Cle-
land, and John M. Martinis.  Optimal quantum con-
trol  using  randomized  benchmarking.Phys. Rev.
Lett., 112:240504, jun 2014.
200.  M. Keyl, R. Zeier, and T. Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen. Con-
trolling  several  atoms  in  a  cavity.New J. Phys.,
16:065010, jun 2014.
201.  N. Khaneja and S. J. Glaser.  Cartan decomposition
of su(2n), constructive controllability of spin systems
and  universal  quantum  computing.Chem. Phys.,
267:11, 2001.
202.  N.  Khaneja  and  S.  J.  Glaser.   Efficient  transfer  of
coherence through Ising spin chains.Phys. Rev. A,
66:060301(R), 2002.
203.  N.   Khaneja,   B.   Heitmann,   A.   Sp ̈orl,   H.   Yuan,
T.  Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.    Short-
est  paths  for  efficient  control  of  indirectly  coupled
qubits.Phys. Rev. A, 75(1):012322, 2007.
204.  N. Khaneja, F. Kramer, and S. J. Glaser.  Optimal
experiments  for  maximizing  coherence  transfer  be-
tween coupled spins.J. Magn. Reson., 173(1):116–
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control23
124, 2005.
205.  N. Khaneja, B. Luy, and S. J. Glaser.  Boundary of
quantum  evolution  under  decoherence.Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 100:13162–13166, 2003.
206.  N. Khaneja, T. Reiss, B. Luy, and S. J. Glaser.  Op-
timal control of spin dynamics in the presence of re-
laxation.J. Magn. Reson., 162:311–319, 2003.
207.  Navin Khaneja. Switched control of electron nuclear
spin systems.Phys. Rev. A, 76:032326, sep 2007.
208.  Navin   Khaneja,   Roger   Brockett,   and   Steffen   J.
Glaser. Time optimal control in spin systems.Phys.
Rev. A, 63:032308, 2001.
209.  Navin Khaneja, Steffen J. Glaser, and Roger Brock-
ett.    Sub-Riemannian  geometry  and  time  optimal
control  of  three  spin  systems:  Quantum  gates  and
coherence transfer.Phys. Rev. A, 65:032301, 2002.
210.  Navin Khaneja, Timo Reiss, Cindie Kehlet, Thomas
Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen, and Steffen J. Glaser.  Optimal
control  of  coupled  spin  dynamics:  design  of  NMR
pulse  sequences  by  gradient  ascent  algorithms.J.
Magn. Reson., 172(2):296–305, 2005.
211.  D. Kim, Z. Shi, C. B. Simmonds, D. R. Ward, J. R.
Prance, T. S. Koh, and M. A.  Eriksson.  Quantum
control and process tomography of a semiconductor
quantum dot hybrid qubit.Nature, 511:70–74, 2014.
212.  Gerhard Kirchmair, Brian Vlastakis,  Zaki Leghtas,
Simon E. Nigg, Hanhee Paik, Eran Ginossar, Maz-
yar Mirrahimi, Luigi Frunzio, S. M. Girvin, and R. J.
Schoelkopf.  Observation of  quantum  state collapse
and revival due to the single-photon kerr effect.Na-
ture, 495(7440):205–209, mar 2013.
213.  D.  E. Kirk.Optimal Control Theory: An introduc-
tion.  Dover Publications, New York, 2004.
214.  Denis   Kiselev,   Luigi   Bonacina,   and   Jean-Pierre
Wolf.   Individual  bioaerosol  particle  discrimination
by multi-photon excited fluorescence.Opt. Express,
19(24):24516–24521, 2011.
215.  K. Kobzar.Optimal Control, Partial Alignment and
More: The Design of Novel Tools for NMR Spec-
troscopy of Small Molecules.  Dissertation, Munich,
2007.
216.  K. Kobzar, S. Ehni, T. E. Skinner, S. J. Glaser, and
B. Luy.  Exploring the limits of broadband 90
◦
and
180
◦
universal  rotation  pulses.J. Magn. Reson.,
225:142–160, 2012.
217.  K.  Kobzar,  B.  Luy,  N.  Khaneja,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.
Pattern pulses: Design of arbitrary excitation profiles
as a function of pulse amplitude and offset.J. Magn.
Reson., 173:229–235, 2005.
218.  K. Kobzar, T. E. Skinner, N. Khaneja, S. J. Glaser,
and B. Luy. Exploring the limits of excitation and in-
version pulses ii. rf-power optimized pulses.J. Magn.
Reson., 194:58–66, 2008.
219.  Kyryl Kobzar, Thomas E. Skinner, Navin Khaneja,
Steffen J. Glaser, and Burkhard Luy.  Exploring the
limits of broadband excitation and inversion pulses.
J. Magn. Reson., 170(2):236–243, 2004.
220.  Christiane  P  Koch,  Jos ́e  P  Palao,  Ronnie  Kosloff,
and  Fran ̧coise Masnou-Seeuws.   Stabilization  of  ul-
tracold molecules using optimal control theory.Phys.
Rev. A, 70(1):013402, 2004.
221.  Christiane  P.  Koch  and  Moshe  Shapiro.   Coherent
control of  ultracold  photoassociation.Chem. Rev.,
212:4928, 2012.
222.  S. S. K ̈ocher, T. Heydenreich, and S. J. Glaser.  Vi-
sualization and analysis of modulated pulses in mag-
netic resonance by joint time–frequency representa-
tions.J. Magn. Reson., 249(0):63–71, 2014.
223.  V.  D.  M.  Koroleva,  S.  Mandal,  Y.-Q.  Song,  and
M. D. H ̈urlimann. Broadband CPMG sequence with
short composite refocusing pulses.J. Magn. Reson.,
230:64–75, 2013.
224.  R. Kosloff, S. A. Rice, P. Gaspard, S. Tersigni, and
D. J. Tannor. Wavepacket dancing: Achieving chem-
ical  selectivity  by  shaping  light  pulses.Chemical
Physics, 139(1):201–220, 1989.
225.  Hanna   Krauter,   Christine   A.   Muschik,   Kasper
Jensen,  Wojciech  Wasilewski,  Jonas  M.  Petersen,
J.  Ignacio  Cirac,  and  Eugene  S.  Polzik.   Entangle-
ment generated by dissipation and steady state en-
tanglement of two macroscopic objects.Phys. Rev.
Lett., 107:080503, 2011.
226.  V.  F.  Krotov.Global Methods in Optimal Control
Theory.  Dekker, New York, 1996.
227.  L.  T.  Kuhn.Hyperpolarization Methods in NMR
Spectroscopy.  Springer, 2013.
228.  O. K ̈uhn and L. W ̈oste, editors.Analysis and control
of ultrafast photoinduced reactions. Springer, Berlin,
2007.
229.  Ilya Kuprov.  Spin system trajectory analysis under
optimal control pulses.J. Magn. Reson., 233(0):107–
112, aug 2013.
230.  G. Kurizki, P. Bertet, Y. Kubo, K. Mølmer, D. Pet-
rosyan,  P.  Rabl,  and  J.  Schmiedmayer.   Quantum
technologies with hybrid systems.Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA, 112:3866–3873, 2015.
231.  I. Kurniawan, G. Dirr, and U. Helmke. Controllabil-
ity aspects of quantum dynamics: A unified approach
for closed and open systems.IEEE Trans. Autom.
Contr. (IEEE-TAC), 57:1984–1996, 2012.
232.  N. A. Kurnit, I. D. Abella, and S. R. Hartmann. Ob-
servation of a photon echo.Phys. Rev. Lett., 13:567–
568, 1964.
233.  M. Lapert, E. Ass ́emat, S. J. Glaser, and D. Sugny.
Understanding   the   global   structure   of   two-level
quantum systems with relaxation: Vector fields orga-
nized through the magic plane and the steady-state
ellipsoid.Phys. Rev. A, 88:033407, 2013.
234.  M. Lapert, E. Ass ́emat, S. J. Glaser, and D. Sugny.
Optimal control of the signal-to-noise ratio per unit
time for a spin-1/2 particle.Phys. Rev. A, 90:023411,
2014.
235.  M. Lapert, J. Salomon, and D. Sugny. Time-optimal
monotonically  convergent  algorithm  with  an  appli-
cation to the control of spin systems.Phys. Rev. A,
85:033406, 2012.
236.  M. Lapert and D. Sugny. Field-free molecular orien-
tation by terahertz laser pulses at high temperature.
24Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
Phys. Rev. A, 85:063418, 2012.
237.  M.  Lapert,  R.  Tehini,  G.  Turinici,  and  D.  Sugny.
Monotonically convergent optimal control theory of
quantum  systems  with  spectral  constraints  on  the
control field.Phys. Rev. A, 79:063411, 2009.
238.  M.  Lapert, Y.  Zhang, M.  Braun, S.  J.  Glaser, and
D.  Sugny.   Singular  extremals for  the  time-optimal
control  of  dissipative  spin
1
2
particles.Phys. Rev.
Lett., 104:083001, feb 2010.
239.  M.  Lapert,  Y.  Zhang,  S.  J.  Glaser,  and  D.  Sugny.
Towards the time-optimal control of dissipative spin
1/2 particles in nuclear magnetic resonance.J. Phys.
B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 44:154014, 2011.
240.  M.  Lapert, Y.  Zhang, M. Janich, S.  J. Glaser, and
D. Sugny. Exploring the physical limits of saturation
contrast  in  magnetic  resonance imaging.Scientific
Reports, 2:589, 2012.
241.  E. B. Lee and L. Markus.Foundations of Optimal
Control Theory.  Wiley, New York, 1967.
242.  J.-S. Lee, R.R. Regatte, and A. Jerschow.  Optimal
nuclear  magnetic  resonance  excitation  schemes  for
the central transition of a spin 3/2 in the presence
of  residual  quadrupolar  coupling.J. Chem. Phys.,
129:224510, 2008.
243.  Liat Levin, Wojciech Skomorowski, Ronnie Kosloff,
and Zohar Koch, Christiane P.and Amitay.  Coher-
ent control of bond making.Phys. Rev. Lett., 114:in
press, jun 2015.
244.  R. J. Levis, G. M. Menkir, and H. Rabitz.  Selective
bond dissociation and rearrangement with optimally
tailored, strong-field laser pulses.Science, 292:709,
2001.
245.  M. H. Levitt.  Composite pulses.Prog. Nucl. Magn.
Reson. Spectrosc., 18:61–122, 1986.
246.  M. H. Levitt.Composite pulses.  Wiley, 1996.
247.  M.  H.  Levitt.Spin Dynamics: Basics of Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance.  Wiley, 2001.
248.  Haowen Li, D. Ahmasi Harris, Bingwei Xu, Paul J.
Wrzesinski, Vadim V. Lozovoy, and Marcos Dantus.
Coherent  mode-selective  raman  excitation  towards
standoff  detection.Opt. Express,  16(8):5499–5504,
2008.
249.  J.-S. Li and N. Khaneja.  Ensemble control of bloch
equations.IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, 54(3):528–
536, 2009.
250.  J.-S.  Li,  J.  Ruths,  T.-Y.  Yu,  H.  Arthanari,  and
G. Wagner.  Optimal pulse design in quantum con-
trol:  A  unified  computational  method.Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 108:1879–1884, 2011.
251.  Jr-Shin Li and Navin Khaneja. Control of inhomoge-
neous quantum ensembles.Phys. Rev. A, 73:030302,
2006.
252.  Xuan  Li,  Cian  Menzel-Jones,  David  Avisar,  and
Moshe  Shapiro.    Solving  the  spectroscopic  phase:
imaging excited wave packets and extracting excited
state potentials from fluorescence data.Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys., 12:15760–15765, 2010.
253.  Chien-Yu  Lien,  Christopher  M  Seck,  Yen-Wei  Lin,
Jason  HV  Nguyen,  David  A  Tabor,  and  Brian  C
Odom.  Broadband optical cooling of molecular ro-
tors  from  room  temperature  to  the  ground  state.
Nat. Commun., 5, 2014.
254.  H. Liu, S. J. Glaser, and G. Drobny.  Development
and optimization  of multipulse  propagators: Appli-
cations to homonuclear spin decoupling in solids.J.
Chem. Phys., 93:7543–7560, 1990.
255.  H. Liu and G. B. Matson.  Radiofrequency pulse de-
signs  for  three-dimensional MRI  providing  uniform
tipping  in  inhomogeneousb
1
fields.Magn. Reson.
Med., 66:1254–1266, 2011.
256.  S. Lloyd and S. Montangero.  Information theoreti-
cal analysis of quantum optimal control.Phys. Rev.
Lett., 113:010502, 2014.
257.  S. Lloyd and L. Viola. Engineering quantum dynam-
ics.Phys. Rev. A, 65:010101, 2001.
258.  Seth Lloyd. Coherent quantum feedback.Phys. Rev.
A, 62:022108, jul 2000.
259.  N. M. Loening, B.-J. van Rossum, and H. Oschkinat.
Broadband excitation pulses for high-field solid-state
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.Magn. Re-
son. Chem., 50:284–288, 2012.
260.  Erik  Lucero,  Julian  Kelly,  Radoslaw  C.  Bialczak,
Mike Lenander,  Matteo  Mariantoni, Matthew  Nee-
ley, A. D. O’Connell, Daniel Sank, H. Wang, Martin
Weides, James Wenner, Tsuyoshi Yamamoto, A. N.
Cleland, and John M. Martinis.  Reduced phase er-
ror through optimized control of a superconducting
qubit.Phys. Rev. A, 82:042339, 2010.
261.  E. Ass ́emat M. Lapert, S. J. Glaser, and D. Sugny.
Optimal control of the signal-to-noise ratio per unit
time  of  a  spin  1/2  particle:  The  crusher  gradient
and the  radiation damping  cases.J. Chem. Phys.,
142:044202/1–9, 2015.
262.  Hideo  Mabuchi.   Coherent-feedback  quantum  con-
trol  with  a  dynamic  compensator.Phys. Rev. A,
78:032323, 2008.
263.  A. W. MacGregor, L.A. O’Dell, and R.W. Schurko.
New  methods  for  the  acquisition  of  ultra-wideline
solid-state  nmr  spectra  of  spin-1/2  nuclides.J.
Magn. Reson., 208:103–113, 2011.
264.  S. Machnes, U. Sander, S. J. Glaser, P. de Fouqui`eres,
A. Gruslys, S. Schirmer, and T. Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen.
Comparing,optimizing,andbenchmarking
quantum-control   algorithms   in   a   unifying   pro-
gramming  framework.Phys. Rev. A,  84:022305,
2011.  software avaibable at qlib.info.
265.  S.  Machnes,  D.  J.  Tannor,  F.  K.  Wilhelm,  and
E. Ass ́emat.  Gradient optimization of analytic con-
trols:  the  route  to  high  accuracy quantum  optimal
control.  arXiv:1507.04261, 2015.
266.  Yvon  Maday  and  Gabriel  Turinici.   New  formula-
tions of  monotonically convergent quantum  control
algorithms.J. Chem. Phys., 118:8191–8196, 2003.
267.  S. Mandal, T. W. Borneman, V. D. M. Koroleva, and
M. D. H ̈urlimann.  Direct optimization of signal-to-
noise ratio of cpmg-like sequences in inhomogeneous
fields.J. Magn. Reson., 247:54–66, 2014.
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control25
268.  Peter Mansfield. Snapshot magnetic resonance imag-
ing  (nobel  lecture).Angewandte Chemie Interna-
tional Edition, 43(41):5456–5464, 2004.
269.  L.   Martin,   F.   Motzoi,   H.   Li,   M.   Sarovar,  and
B.   Whaley.Deterministic   generation   of   re-
mote  entanglement  with  active  quantum  feedback.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.07888, 2015.
270.  Una Marvet and Marcos Dantus.  Femtosecond pho-
toassociation  spectroscopy:  coherent  bond  forma-
tion.Chem. Phys. Lett., 245(4-5):393–399, 1995.
271.  R. Marx, A. F. Fahmy, L. Kauffman, S. Lomonaco,
A.   Sp ̈orl,   N.   Pomplun,   T.   Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen,
J.  Myers,  and  S.J.  Glaser.   Nuclear  magnetic  reso-
nance quantum calculations of the jones polynomial.
Phys. Rev. A, 81:032319, 2010.
272.  A. Massire, M. A. Cloos, A. Vignaud, D. Le Bihan,
A. Amadon, and N. Boulant. Design of non-selective
refocusing  pulses  with  phase-free  rotation  axis  by
gradient ascent pulse engineering algorithm in paral-
lel transmission at 7 t.J. Magn. Reson., 230:76–83,
2013.
273.  Thomas E. Matthews, Ivan R. Piletic, M. Angelica
Selim, Mary Jane Simpson, and Warren S. Warren.
Pump-probe  imaging  differentiates  melanoma  from
melanocytic  nevi.Science Translational Medicine,
3(71):71ra15, 2011.
274.  B. M. Maune, M. G. Borselli, B. Huang, T. D. Ladd,
P. W. Deelman, K. S. Holabird, and A. T. Hunter.
Coherent singlet-triplet oscillations in a silicon-based
double quantum dot.Nature, 481:344–347, 2012.
275.  I. Maximov, Z. Tosner, and N. C. Nielsen.  Optimal
control design of NMR and dynamic nuclear polar-
ization experiments using monotonically convergent
algorithms.J. Chem. Phys., 128:184505, 2008.
276.  S.  Meister,  J.  T.  Stockburger,  R.  Schmidt,  and
J. Ankerhold. Optimal control theory with arbitrary
superpositions of waveforms.J. Phys. A, 47:495002,
2014.
277.  Andrea Merli, Frauke Eimer, Fabian Weise, Albrecht
Lindinger, Wenzel Salzmann, Terry Mullins, Simone
G ̈otz, Roland Wester, Matthias Weidem ̈uller, Ruzin
A ̆gano ̆glu, and Christiane P. Koch. Photoassociation
and coherent transient dynamics in the interaction of
ultracold rubidium atoms with shaped femtosecond
pulses. ii. theory.Phys. Rev. A, 80:063417, 2009.
278.  Doron  Meshulach  and  Yaron  Silberberg.   Coherent
quantum control of two-photon transitions by a fem-
tosecond laser pulse.Nature, 396:239–242, 1998.
279.  M.  Mirrahimi  and  P.  Rouchon.   Controllability  of
quantum  harmonic  oscillators.IEEE Trans. Au-
tomat. Control, 49(5):745–747, may 2004.
280.  AntoineMonmayrant,S ́ebastienWeber,and
B ́eatrice  chatel.   A  newcomer’s  guide  to  ultrashort
pulse shaping and characterization.J. Phys. B: At.,
Mol. Opt. Phys., 43(10):103001, may 2010.
281.  Simone Montangero, Tommaso Calarco, and Rosario
Fazio.  Robust optimal quantum gates for josephson
charge qubits.Phys. Rev. Lett., 99:170501, 2007.
282.  M. M ̈ott ̈onen, R. de Sousa, J. Zhang, and K. B. Wha-
ley. High-fidelity one-qubit operations under random
telegraph noise.Phys. Rev. A, 73:022332, 2006.
283.  F. Motzoi, J. M. Gambetta, S. T. Merkel, and F. K.
Wilhelm. Optimal control methods for rapidly time-
varying  Hamiltonians.Phys. Rev. A,  84:022307,
2011.
284.  F. Motzoi, J. M. Gambetta, P. Rebentrost, and F. K.
Wilhelm.Simple  pulses  for  elimination  of  leak-
age  in  weakly  nonlinear  qubits.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103:110509, 2009.
285.  J.  T.  Muhonen,  A.  Laucht,  S.  Simmons,  J.  P.  De-
hollain,  R.  Kalra,  F.  E.  Hudson,  S.  Freer,  K.  M.
Itoh, D.  N.  Jamieson, J.  C. McCallum,  A.  S.  Dzu-
rak, and A. Morello.  Quantifying the quantum gate
fidelity of single-atom spin qubits in silicon by ran-
domized benchmarking.J. Phys: Condens. Matter,
27(15):154205, 2015.
286.  V. Mukherjee, A. Carlini, A. Mari, T. Caneva, Mon-
tangerom  S.,  T.  Carlarco,  R.  Fazio,  and  V.  Gio-
vannetti.  Speeding up and slowing down the relax-
ation of a qubit by optimal control.Phys. Rev. A,
88:062326, 2013.
287.  C.  M ̈uller,  X.  Kong,  J.-M.  Cai,  K.  Melentijevi ́c,
A.  Stacey,  M.  Markham,  D.  Twitchen,  J.  Isoya,
S.  Pezzagna,  J.  Meijer,  J.  F.  Du,  M.  B.  Plenio,
B. Naydenov, L. P. McGuinness, and F. Jelezko. Nu-
clear  magnetic  resonance  spectroscopy  with  single
spin sensitivity.Nat. Commun., 5:4703, 2014.
288.  M.  M.  M ̈uller,  D.  M.  Reich,  M.  Murphy,  H.  Yuan,
J. Vala, K. B. Whaley, T. Calarco, and C. P. Koch.
Optimizing  entangling  quantum  gates  for  physical
systems.Phys. Rev. A, 84:042315, 2011.
289.  J.  B.  Murdoch,  A.  H.  Lent,  and  M.  R.  Kritzer.
Computer-optimized  narrowband  pulses  for  multi-
slice imaging.J. Magn. Reson., 74:226–263, 1987.
290.  Michael Murphy, Simone Montangero, Vittorio Gio-
vannetti, and Tommaso Calarco. Communication at
the quantum speed limit along a spin chain.Phys.
Rev. A, 82:022318, 2010.
291.  Navin N. Khaneja, Jr-Shin J.-S. Li, Cindie  Kehlet,
Burkhard   Luy,   and   Steffen   J.   Glaser.Broad-
band  relaxation-optimized  polarization  transfer  in
magnetic  resonance.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
101(41):14742–14747, 2004.
292.  J.  L.  Neves,  B.  Heitmann,  N.  Khaneja,  and  S.  J.
Glaser.  Heteronuclear decoupling by optimal track-
ing.J. Magn. Reson., 201:7–17, 2009.
293.  K.  K.  Ni,  S.  Ospelkaus,  M.  H.  G.  de  Miranda,
A. Pe’er, B. Neyenhuis, J. J. Zirbel, S. Kotochigova,
P.  S.  Julienne,  D.  S.  Jin,  and  J.  Ye.A  high
phase-space-density gas of polar molecules.Science,
322(5899):231–235, 2008.
294.  Qing Zhe Ni, Daviso E, Can TV, Markhasin E, Jawla
SK, Swager TM, Temkin RJ, Herzfeld J, and Griffin
RG.   High  frequency  dynamic nuclear  polarization.
Accounts in Chemical Research, 46:1933–1941, 2013.
295.  M.  Nimbalkar, B.  Luy,  T.  E. Skinner,  J.  L.  Neves,
N. I. Gershenzon, K. Kobzar, W. Bermel, and S. J.
26Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
Glaser. The fantastic four: A plug ’n’ play set of op-
timal control pulses for enhancing nmr spectroscopy.
J. Magn. Reson., 228:16–31, 2013.
296.  M.  Nimbalkar,  R.  Zeier,  J.  L.  Neves,  H.  Elavarasi,
S. B. Yuan, N. Khaneja, K. Dorai, and S. J. Glaser.
Multiple-spin coherence transfer in linear ising spin
chains  and  beyond:  Numerically  optimized  pulses
and experiments.Phys. Rev. A, 85:012325, 2012.
297.  Patrick Nuernberger, Gerhard Vogt, Tobias Brixner,
and Gustav Gerber.  Femtosecond quantum control
of molecular dynamics in the condensed phase.Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys., 9:2470–2497, 2007.
298.  Patrick Nuernberger, Daniel  Wolpert,  Horst Weiss,
and Gustav Gerber.  Femtosecond quantum control
of molecular bond formation.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A, 107(23):10366–10370, 2010.
299.  Jennifer  P.  Ogilvie, Delphine  D ́ebarre, Xavier  Soli-
nas, Jean-Louis Martin, Emmanuel Beaurepaire, and
Manuel  Joffre.    Use  of  coherent  control  for  selec-
tive  two-photon  fluorescence  microscopy in  live  or-
ganisms.Opt. Express, 14(2):759–766, 2006.
300.  C. O’Meara, G. Dirr, and T. Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen. Il-
lustrating the geometry of coherently controlled uni-
tal  open  quantum  systems.IEEE Trans. Autom.
Contr. (IEEE-TAC),  57:2050–2054,  2012.   (an  ex-
tended version can be found as arXiv:1103.2703).
301.  Dan  Oron, Eran Tal,  and  Yaron  Silberberg.   Scan-
ningless  depth-resolved  microscopy.Opt. Express,
13(5):1468–1476, 2005.
302.  A.W. Overhauser.  Polarization of nuclei in metals.
Phys. Rev., 92:411–415, 1953.
303.  Jos ́e P.  Palao and  Ronnie  Kosloff.   Quantum  com-
puting by an optimal control algorithm for unitary
transformations.Phys. Rev. Lett., 89:188301, 2002.
304.  Jos ́e P. Palao and Ronnie Kosloff.  Optimal control
theory  for  unitary  transformations.Phys. Rev. A,
68:062308, 2003.
305.  Jos ́e  P.  Palao,  Daniel  M.  Reich,  and  Christiane  P.
Koch.    Steering  the  optimization  pathway  in  the
control landscape using  constraints.Phys. Rev. A,
88:053409, 2013.
306.  K.  R.  Parthasarathy.An introduction to quantum
stochastic calculus.  Birkhauser, Basel, 1992.
307.  G. Passante, O. Moussa, C. Ryan, and R. Laflamme.
Experimental approximation of the jones polynomial
by one quantum bit.Phys. Rev. Lett., 103:250501,
2009.
308.  Igor Pastirk, Johanna Dela Cruz, Katherine Walow-
icz,  Vadim  Lozovoy,  and  Marcos  Dantus.Selec-
tive  two-photon  microscopy  with  shaped  femtosec-
ond pulses.Opt. Express, 11(14):1695–1701, 2003.
309.  A. Pechen and H. Rabitz. Incoherent control of open
quantum systems.Journal of Mathematical Sciences,
199(6):695–701, jun 2014.
310.  A.  N.  Pechen  and  D.  J.  Tannor.   Are  there  traps
in  quantum  control  landscapes?Phys. Rev. Lett.,
106:120402, 2011.
311.  A. N. Pechen and D. J. Tannor.  Comment on ”are
there traps in quantum control landscapes?”: Reply.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 108:198902, 2012.
312.  A. Peirce, M. Dahleh, and H. Rabitz.  Optimal con-
trol of quantum mechanical systems: Existence, nu-
merical approximations and applications.Phys. Rev.
A, 37:4950–4962, 1987.
313.  J. R. Petta, A. C. Johnson, J. M. Taylor, E. A. Laird,
A. Yacoby, M. D. Lukin, C. M. Marcus, and A. C.
Gossard.    Coherent  manipulation  of  coupled  elec-
tron spins in semiconductor quantum dots.Science,
309(5744):2180–2184, 2005.
314.  Walter  Pfeiffer,  Martin  Aeschlimann,  and  Tobias
Brixner.Optical Antennas,  chapter  Coherent  con-
trol of nano-optical excitations, pages 135–156. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2013. Cambridge Books On-
line.
315.  Rajesh   S.   Pillai,   Caroline   Boudoux,   Guillaume
Labroille, Nicolas Olivier, Israel Veilleux, Emmanuel
Farge,  Manuel  Joffre,  and  Emmanuel  Beaurepaire.
Multiplexed two-photon microscopy ofdynamic bio-
logical samples with shapedbroadband pulses.Opt.
Express, 17(15):12741–12752, 2009.
316.  J.  J.  Pla,  K.  Y.  Tan,  J.  P.  Dehollain,  W.  H.  Lim,
J.  J.  Morton,  D.  N.  Jamieson,  and  A.  Morello.   A
single-atom  electron  spin  qubit  in  silicon.Nature,
489:541–545, 2012.
317.  J.  J.  Pla,  K.  Y.  Tan,  J.  P.  Dehollain,  W.  H.  Lim,
J. J. L. Morton, F. A. Zwanenburg, D. N. Jamieson,
A. S. Dzurak, and A. Morello.  High-fidelity readout
and control of a nuclear spin qubit in silicon.Nature,
496:334–338, 2013.
318.  Felix  Platzer,  Florian  Mintert,  and  Andreas  Buch-
leitner.   Optimal  dynamical  control  of  many-body
entanglement.Phys. Rev. Lett., 105(2):020501, 2010.
319.  N.  Pomplun  and  S.  J.  Glaser.   Exploring  the  lim-
its of electron-nuclear polarization transfer efficiency
in  three-spin  systems.Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.,
12:5791–5798, 2010.
320.  N.  Pomplun,  B.  Heitmann,  N.  Khaneja,  and  S.  J.
Glaser.   Optimization  of  electron–nuclear  polariza-
tion  transfer.Applied Magnetic Resonance,  34(3–
4):331–346, 2008.
321.  L. S. Pontryagin, V. G. Bol’tanskii, R. S. Gamkre-
lidze, and E. F. Mischenko.The Mathematical The-
ory of Optimal Processes.    Pergamon  Press,  New
York, 1964.
322.  L. S. Pontryagin, V. G. Boltyanskii, R. V. Gamkre-
lidze, and E. F. Mishchenko.The Mathematical The-
ory of Optimal Processes.  Wiley, New York, 1962.
323.  Uffe V. Poulsen, Shlomo Sklarz, David Tannor, and
Tommaso Calarco.  Correcting errors in a quantum
gate with pushed ions via optimal control.Phys. Rev.
A, 82:012339, jul 2010.
324.  J.  Preskill.    Quantum  computing  and  the  entan-
glement  frontier.arXiv:1203.5813,  2012.   Rappor-
teur talk at the 25th Solvay Conference on Physics
(”The Theory of the Quantum World”), 19-22 Octo-
ber 2011.
325.  Valentyn I Prokhorenko, Andrea M Nagy, Stephen A
Waschuk,  Leonid  S  Brown,  Robert  R  Birge,  and
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control27
RJ   Dwayne   Miller.Coherent   control   of   reti-
nal  isomerization  in  bacteriorhodopsin.Science,
313(5791):1257–1261, 2006.
326.  H.  Rabitz,  R.  de  Vivie-Riedle,  M.  Motzkus,  and
K. Kompa.  Whither the future of controlling quan-
tum phenomena?Science, 288:824, may 2000.
327.  H. Rabitz, T. S. Ho, R. Long, R. Wu, and C. Brif.
Comment  on:  Are  there  traps  in  quantum  control
landscapes?Phys. Rev. Lett., 108:198901, 2012.
328.  S.  Ramakrishna  and  T.  Seideman.Intense  laser
alignment in dissipative media as a route to solvent
dynamics.Phys. Rev. Lett., 95:113001, 2005.
329.  G. Rancan, T. T. Nguyen, and S. J. Glaser. Gradient
ascent pulse engineering for rapid exchange satura-
tion transfer.J. Magn. Reson., 252:1–9, 2015.
330.  P. Rebentrost, I. Serban, T. Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen, and
F. K. Wilhelm.  Optimal control of a qubit coupled
to a non-Markovian environment.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
102:090401, 2009.
331.  Jean Rehbinder, Lukas Br ̈uckner, Alexander Wipfler,
Tiago  Buckup,  and  Marcus  Motzkus.   Multimodal
nonlinear   optical   microscopy  with   shaped   10   fs
pulses.Opt. Express, 22(23):28790–28797, 2014.
332.  Daniel  Reich,  Mamadou  Ndong,  and  Christiane  P.
Koch.Monotonically  convergent  optimization  in
quantum control using Krotov’s method.J. Chem.
Phys., 136:104103, 2012.
333.  Daniel  M.  Reich,  Nadav  Katz,  and  Christiane  P.
Koch.Exploiting  non-markovianity  for  quantum
control.Sci. Rep., 5:12430, 2015.
334.  Daniel  M.  Reich  and  Christiane  P.  Koch.   Cooling
molecular  vibrations  with  shaped  laser  pulses:  Op-
timal  control  theory  exploiting  the  timescale  sep-
aration  between  coherent  excitation  and  sponta-
neous emission.New J. Phys., 15(12):125028, 2013.
arXiv:1308.0803.
335.  Daniel  M.  Reich,  Jos ́e  P.  Palao,  and  Christiane  P.
Koch.   Optimal  control  under  spectral  constraints:
Enforcing  multi-photon  absorption  pathways.J.
Mod. Opt., 61(10):822, 2014.
336.  J.  E.  Reiner,  W.  P.  Smith,  L.  A.  Orozco,  H.  M.
Wiseman, and J. Gambetta.  Quantum feedback in
a  weakly  driven  cavity  qed  system.Phys. Rev. A,
70:023819, 2004.
337.  Tony  Reinsperger  and  Burkhard  Luy.Homonu-
clear bird-decoupled spectra for measuring one-bond
couplings  with  highest  resolution:  Clip/clap-reset
and constant-time-clip/clap-reset.J. Magn. Reson.,
239:110–120, 2014.
338.  T.  O.  Reiss,  N.  Khaneja,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.   Time-
optimal   coherence-order-selective   transfer   of   in-
phase coherence in heteronuclear is spin systems.J.
Magn. Reson., 154(2):192–195, 2002.
339.  T. O. Reiss, N. Khaneja, and S. J. Glaser. Broadband
geodesic pulses for three spin systems: time-optimal
realization  of  effective  trilinear  coupling  terms  and
indirect SWAP gates.J. Magn. Reson., 165(1):95–
101, 2003.
340.  S.  Rice  and  M.  Zhao.Optimal control of quantum
dynamics.  Wiley, New York, 2000.
341.  S. A. Rice and M. Zhao.Optical control of molecular
dynamics.  John Wiley & Sons, 2000.
342.  D. Riste, C. C. Bulting, K. W. Lehnert, and L. Di-
Carlo.   Feedback  control  of  a  solid-state  qubit  us-
ing high-fidelity projective measurement.Phys. Rev.
Lett., 109:240502, 2012.
343.  G.  Riviello,  K.  Moore  Tibbetts,  C.  Brif,  R.  Long,
R.-B.  Wu,  T.-S.  Ho,  and  H.  Rabitz.   Searching for
quantum optimal controls under severe constraints.
Phys. Rev. A, 91:043401, 2015.
344.  Katharina Rojan, Daniel  M.  Reich,  Igor  Dotsenko,
Jean-Michel Raimond, Christiane P. Koch, and Gio-
vanna Morigi.  Arbitrary-quantum-state preparation
of  a  harmonic  oscillator  viaoptimal  control.Phys.
Rev. A, 90:023824, 2014.  arXiv:1406.6572.
345.  S. Rosi, A. Bernard, N. Fabbri, L. Fallani, C. Fort,
M.  Inguscio,  T.  Calarco, and  S.  Montangero.   Fast
closed-loop optimal control of ultracold atoms in an
optical lattice.Phys. Rev. A, 88:021601, aug 2013.
346.  Rene Rugango, James E Goeders, Thomas H Dixon,
John  M  Gray,  NB  Khanyile,  Gang  Shu,  Robert  J
Clark, and Kenneth R Brown.  Sympathetic cooling
of molecular ion motion to the ground state.New J.
Phys., 17(3):035009, 2015.
347.  A.  Ruschhaupt,  Xi  Chen,  D.  Alonso,  and  J.  G.
Muga. Optimally robust shortcuts to population in-
version in two-level quantum systems.New J. Phys.,
14(9):093040, 2012.
348.  C. A. Ryan, C. Negrevergne, M. Laforest, E. Knill,
and R. Laflamme. Liquid-state nuclear magnetic res-
onance as a testbed for developing quantum control
methods.Phys. Rev. A, 78:012328, 2008.
349.  Leonid Rybak, Saieswari Amaran, Liat Levin, Micha l
Tomza,  Robert  Moszynski,  Ronnie  Kosloff,  Chris-
tiane P. Koch, and Zohar Amitay. Generating molec-
ular rovibrational coherence by two-photon femtosec-
ond photoassociation of thermally hot atoms.Phys.
Rev. Lett., 107:273001, 2011.
350.  T. Ryb ́ar, S.N. Filippov, M. Ziman, and V. Buzek.
Simulation of indivisible  qubit channels in  collision
models.J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 45:154006,
2012.
351.  Smith  SA,  Levante  TO,  Meier  BH,  and  Ernst RR.
Computer  simulations  in  magnetic  resonance.  an
object-oriented  programming  approach.J. Magn.
Reson., 106:75–105, 1994.
352.  J.  Salomon,  C.  Dion,  and  G.  Turinici.Optimal
molecular  alignment  and  orientation  through  rota-
tional ladder climbing.J. Chem. Phys., 123:144310,
2005.
353.  W.   Salzmann,   T.   Mullins,   J.   Eng,   M.   Albert,
R.  Wester,  M.  Weidem ̈uller,  A.  Merli,  S.  M.  We-
ber, F. Sauer, M. Plewicki, F. Weise, L. W ̈oste, and
A. Lindinger.  Coherent transients in the femtosec-
ond photoassociation of ultracold molecules.Phys.
Rev. Lett., 100:233003, jun 2008.
28Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
354.  M.  S.  Sarandy  and  D.  A.  Lidar.   Adiabatic  quan-
tum computation in open systems.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
95:250503, 2005.
355.  D. V. Savostyanov, S. V. Dolgov, J. M. Werner, and
Ilya Kuprov.  Exact NMR simulation of protein-size
spin systems using tensor train formalism.Phys. Rev.
B, 90:085139, 2014.
356.  Cl ́ement   Sayrin,  Igor   Dotsenko,  Xingxing   Zhou,
Bruno   Peaudecerf,   Th ́eo   Rybarczyk,   S ́ebastien
Gleyzes, Pierre Rouchon, Mazyar Mirrahimi, Hadis
Amini,  Michel  Brune,  Jean-Michel  Raimond,  and
Serge  Haroche.   Real-time  quantum  feedback  pre-
pares and stabilizes photon number states.Nature,
477:73–77, sep 2011.
357.  Duckett S.B. and Mewis R.E. Application of parahy-
drogen induced polarization techniques in nmr spec-
troscopy  and  imaging.Acc. Chem. Res.,  45:1247–
1257, 2012.
358.  Ido  Schaefer  and  Ronnie  Kosloff.   Optimal-control
theory  of  harmonic  generation.Phys. Rev. A,
86:063417, 2012.
359.  Jochen  Scheuer,  Xi  Kong,  Ressa  S.  Said,  Jeson
Chen, Andrea Kurz, Luca Marseglia, Jiangfeng Du,
Philip  R.  Hemmer,  Simone  Montangero,  Tommaso
Calarco, Boris Naydenov, and Fedor Jelezko. Precise
qubit control beyond the rotating wave approxima-
tion.New J. Phys., 16(9):093022, 2014.
360.  F. Schilling and S. J. Glaser. Tailored real-time scal-
ing  of  heteronuclear  couplings.J. Magn. Reson.,
223:207–218, 2012.
361.  F. Schilling, N. I. Warner, T. E. Gershenzon, M. Sat-
tler,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.   Next-generation  heteronu-
clear  decoupling  for  high-field  biomolecular  NMR
spectroscopy.Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 53:4475–4479,
2014.
362.  S. G. Schirmer, H. Fu, and A. I. Solomon. Complete
controllability  of  quantum  systems.Phys. Rev. A,
63:063410, may 2001.
363.  S. G. Schirmer and P. J. Pemberton-Ross. Fast, high-
fidelity information transmission through spin-chain
quantum wires.Phys. Rev. A, 80:030301, 2009.
364.  S.  G.  Schirmer  and  X.  Wang.Stabilizing  open
quantum  systems  by  markovian reservoir engineer-
ing.Phys. Rev. A, 81:062306, 2010.
365.  R. Schmidt, A. Negretti, J. Ankerhold, T. Calarco,
and J.T. Stockburger. Optimal control of open quan-
tum systems: Cooperative effects of driving and dis-
sipation.Phys. Rev. Lett., 107:130404, 2011.
366.  Markus Schr ̈oder and Alex Brown.  Generalized fil-
tering of laser fields in optimal control theory: appli-
cation to symmetry filtering of quantum gate opera-
tions.New J. Phys., 11:105031, 2009.
367.  T.    Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen,    R.    Marx,    A.    Fahmy,
L. Kauffman, S. Lomonaco, N. Khaneja, , and S.J.
Glaser.  Control aspects of quantum computing us-
ing pure and mixed states.Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A,
370:4651, 2012.
368.  T.  Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen,  A.  Sp ̈orl,  N.  Khaneja,  and
S. J. Glaser. Optimal control for generating quantum
gates in open dissipative systems.J. Phys. B: At.,
Mol. Opt. Phys., 44:154013, aug 2011.
369.  T. Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen, A. K. Sp ̈orl, N. Khaneja, and
S. J. Glaser.  Optimal control-based efficient synthe-
sis of building blocks of quantum algorithms: A per-
spective from network complexity towards time com-
plexity.Phys. Rev. A, 72:042331, 2005.
370.  T.  Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen,  A.  K.  Sp ̈orl,  K.  Waldherr,
T.  Gradl,  S.  J.  Glaser,  and  T.  Huckle.in: High-
Performance Computing in Science and Engineer-
ing, Garching 2007, chapter ’Using the HLRB Clus-
ter  as  Quantum  CISC  Compiler’,  pages  517–533.
Springer, Berlin, 2008.  (an extended version can be
found under: http://arXiv.org/pdf/0712.3227).
371.  David   Schulze-Suenninghausen,   Johanna   Becker,
and Burkhard Luy. Rapid heteronuclear single quan-
tum correlation nmr spectra at natural abundance.
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 136(4):1242–1245, 2014.
372.  R. Schutjens, F. Abu Dagga, D. J. Egger, and F. K.
Wilhelm.   Single-qubit  gates  in  frequency-crowded
transmon systems.Phys. Rev. A, 88:052330, 2013.
373.  A.  Schweiger  and  G.  Jeschke.Principles of pulse
electron paramagnetic resonance.  Oxford University
Press, 2001.
374.  T Seideman and E. Hamilton.  Nonadiabatic align-
ment by intense pulses: Concepts, theory and direc-
tions.Adv. At. Mol. Opt. Phys., 52:289, 2006.
375.  I.  Serban,  J.  Werschnik,  and  E.  K.  U.  Gross.   Op-
timal control of time-dependent targets.Phys. Rev.
A, 71:053810, may 2005.
376.  Arnaldo L  Serrano, Ayanjeet  Ghosh,  Joshua S  Os-
trander,  and  Martin  T  Zanni.   Wide-field  ftir  mi-
croscopy using mid-ir pulse shaping.Opt. Express,
23(14):17815–17827, 2015.
377.  M. Shapiro and P. Brumer.Principles of quantum
control of mulecular processes.    Wiley,  New  York,
2003.
378.  Kilian  Singer,  Ulrich  Poschinger,  Michael  Murphy,
Peter  Ivanov, Frank  Ziesel,  Tommaso Calarco, and
Ferdinand  Schmidt-Kaler.Colloquium:  Trapped
ions as quantum bits: Essential numerical tools.Rev.
Mod. Phys., 82:2609–2632, 2010.
379.  T. E. Skinner, M. Braun, K. Woelk, N. I. Gershen-
zon, and S. J. Glaser.  Design and application of ro-
bust rf pulses for toroid cavity nmr spectroscopy.J.
Magn. Reson., 209:282–290, 2011.
380.  T. E. Skinner and N. I. Gershenzon. Optimal control
design of pulse shapes as analytic functions.J. Magn.
Reson., 204:248, 2010.
381.  T.  E.  Skinner,  N.  I.  Gershenzon,  M.  Nimbalkar,
W.  Bermel,  B.  Luy,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.   New  strate-
gies  for  designing  robust  universal  rotation  pulses:
Application to broadband refocusing at low power.
J. Magn. Reson., 216:78–87, 2012.
382.  T. E. Skinner, N. I. Gershenzon, M. Nimbalkar, and
S. J. Glaser. Optimal control design of band-selective
excitation pulses that accommodate relaxation and
rf inhomogeneity.J. Magn. Reson., 217:53–60, 2012.
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control29
383.  T. E. Skinner, T. O. Reiss, B. Luy, N. Khaneja, and
S.  J.  Glaser.   Reducing  the  duration  of  broadband
excitation pulses using optimal control with limited
RF amplitude.J. Magn. Reson., 167:68–74, 2004.
384.  TE   Skinner,   K   Kobzar,   B   Luy,   MR   Bendall,
W  Bermel,  N.  Khaneja,  and  S.  J.  Glaser.Op-
timal  control  design  of  constant  amplitude  phase-
modulated  pulses:  Application  to  calibration-free
broadband excitation.J. Magn. Reson., 179(2):241–
249, apr 2006.
385.  TE  Skinner,  TO  Reiss,  B  Luy,  N  Khaneja,  and
SJ Glaser.  Tailoring the optimal control cost func-
tion to a desired output: application to minimizing
phase errors in short broadband excitation pulses.J.
Magn. Reson., 172(1):17–23, 2005.
386.  Thomas E. Skinner, Timo O. Reiss, Burkhard Luy,
Navin Khaneja, and Steffen J. Glaser.  Application
of optimal control theory to the design of broadband
excitation pulses for high-resolution NMR.J. Magn.
Reson., 163(1):8–15, 2003.
387.  Shlomo E. Sklarz and David J. Tannor.  Loading a
Bose-Einstein condensate onto an optical lattice: An
application of optimal control theory to the nonlinear
Schr ̈odinger equation.Phys. Rev. A,  66(5):053619,
2002.
388.  Dimitris Sofikitis, S ́ebastien Weber, Andr ́ea Fioretti,
Ridha  Horchani,  Maria  Allegrini,  B ́eatrice  Chatel,
Daniel Comparat, and Pierre Pillet. Molecular vibra-
tional cooling by optical pumping with shaped fem-
tosecond pulses.New J. Phys., 11(5):055037, 2009.
389.  J. Soml ́oi, V. A. Kazakovski, and D. J. Tannor. Con-
trolled  dissociation of  I
2
via optical  transitions be-
tween the X and B electronic states.Chem. Phys.,
172:85–98, 1993.
390.  E. Sontag.Mathematical Control Theory.  Springer,
New York, 1998.
391.  Philipp  E.  Spindler,  Yun  Zhang,  Burkhard  Ende-
ward, Naum Gershernzon, Thomas E. Skinner, Stef-
fen J. Glaser, and Thomas F. Prisner.  Shaped op-
timal  control  pulses  for  increased  excitation  band-
width in EPR.J. Magn. Reson., 218(0):49–58, may
2012.
392.  A.   Sp ̈orl,   T.   Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen,   S.   J.   Glaser,
V. Bergholm, M. J. Storcz, J. Ferber, and F. K. Wil-
helm.  Optimal control of coupled josephson qubits.
Phys. Rev. A, 75:012302, 2007.
393.  H. Stapelfeldt and T. Seideman.  Aligning molecules
with  strong  laser  pulses.Rev. Mod. Phys.,  75:543,
2003.
394.  Henrik Stapelfeldt and Tamar Seideman.Colloquium
: Aligning molecules with strong laser pulses.Rev.
Mod. Phys., 75:543–557, apr 2003.
395.  D. Stefanatos, N. Khaneja, and S. J. Glaser. Optimal
control of coupled spins in presence of longitudinal
and transverse relaxation.Phys. Rev. A, 69:022319,
2004.
396.  D. Stefanatos, N. Khaneja, and S. J. Glaser.  Relax-
ation optimized transfer of spin order in ising chains.
Phys. Rev. A, 72:062320, 2005.
397.  Andreas Steinbacher, Patrick Nuernberger, and To-
bias  Brixner.Optical  discrimination  of  racemic
from  achiral solutions.Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.,
17:6340–6346, 2015.
398.  M.  Sugawara.    General  formulation  of  locally  de-
signed coherent control theory for quantum system.
J. Chem. Phys., 118(15):6784, 2003.
399.  D.  Sugny,  A.  Keller,  O.  Atabek,  D.  Daems,  C.  M.
Dion, S. Gu ́erin, and H. R. Jauslin.  Reaching opti-
mally oriented molecular states by laser kicks.Phys.
Rev. A, 69:033402, mar 2004.
400.  D. Sugny, C. Kontz, and H. R. Jauslin. Time-optimal
control  of  a  two-level  dissipative  quantum  system.
Phys. Rev. A, 76:023419, 2007.
401.  Benjamin  J.  Sussman,  Dave  Townsend,  Misha  Yu.
Ivanov, and  Albert  Stolow.  Dynamic  stark control
of photochemical processes.Science, 314(5797):278–
281, 2006.
402.  H.  Sussmann  and  V.  Jurdjevic.   Controllability  of
nonlinear systems.Journal of Differential Equations,
12:95–116, 1972.
403.  D. J. Tannor and A. Bartana.  On the interplay of
control fields and spontaneous emission in laser cool-
ing.J. Phys. Chem. A, 103:10359–10363, 1999.
404.  David J. Tannor.Introduction to Quantum Mechan-
ics: A Time-Dependent Perspective.  University Sci-
ence Books, Sausalito, Sausalito, 2007.
405.  David J. Tannor, Ronnie Kosloff, and Stuart A. Rice.
Coherent pulse sequence induced control of selectiv-
ity of reactions: Exact quantum mechanical calcula-
tions.J. Chem. Phys., 85(10):5805–5820, 1986.
406.  David J. Tannor and Stuart A. Rice. Control of selec-
tivity of chemical reaction via control of wave packet
evolution.J. Chem. Phys.,  83(10):5013–5018, aug
1985.
407.  D.J. Tannor, V Kazakov, and V. Orlov.  Control of
photochemical branching: Novel procedures for find-
ing  optimal  pulses  and  global  upper  bounds.    In
J.  Broeckhove  and  L.  Lathouwers,  editors,Time-
dependent quantum molecular dynamics, pages 347–
360. Plenum, 1992.
408.  Carmen   M.   Tesch   and   Regina   de   Vivie-Riedle.
Quantum  computation  with  vibrationally  excited
molecules.Phys. Rev. Lett., 89:157901, sep 2002.
409.  S. Teufel.Adiabatic perturbation theory in quantum
dynamics.  Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003.
410.  K. Moore Tibbetts and H. Rabitz. Constrained con-
trol landscape for population transfer in a two-level
system.Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 17:3164, 2015.
411.  Katharine Moore Tibbetts, Maryam Tarazkar, Tim-
othy Bohinski, Dmitri A Romanov, Spiridoula Mat-
sika, and Robert J Levis. Controlling the dissociation
dynamics of acetophenone radical cation through ex-
citation of ground and excited state wavepackets.J.
Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 48(16):164002, 2015.
412.  N. Timoney, V. Elman, S. Glaser, C. Weiss, M. Jo-
hanning,   W.   Neuhauser,   and   Chr.   Wunderlich.
Error-resistant single-qubit gates with trapped ions.
Phys. Rev. A, 77:052334, may 2008.
30Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control
413.  Erik   Torrontegui,   Sara   Ib ́a ̃nez,   Sofia   Mart ́ınez-
Garaot, Michele Modugno, Adolfo del Campo, David
Gu ́ery-Odelin,  Andreas  Ruschhaupt,  Xi  Chen,  and
Juan Gonzalo Muga.  Shortcuts to adiabaticity.  In
Ennio Arimondo, Paul R. Berman, and Chun C. Lin,
editors,Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical
Physics,  volume 62 ofAdvances In Atomic, Molec-
ular, and Optical Physics, pages 117–169. Academic
Press, 2013.
414.  Z.  Tosner,  S.  J.  Glaser,  N.  Khaneja,  and  N.  C.
Nielsen.  Effective hamiltonians by optimal control:
Solid-state nmr double-quantum planar and isotropic
dipolar recoupling.J. Chem. Phys.,  125:184502/1–
10, 2006.
415.  Zdenˇek  Toˇsner, Thomas  Vosegaard, Cindie  Kehlet,
Navin  Khaneja,  Steffen  J.  Glaser,  and  Niels  Chr.
Nielsen.  Optimal control in NMR spectroscopy: Nu-
merical implementation in SIMPSON.J. Magn. Re-
son., 197(2):120–134, apr 2009.
416.  C.  Trallero-Herrero,  D.  Cardoza,  T.  C.  Weinacht,
and  J.  L.  Cohen.   Coherent  control  of  strong  field
multiphoton absorption in the presence of dynamic
stark shifts.Phys. Rev. A, 71:013423, 2005.
417.  Carlos  Trallero-Herrero,  J.  L.  Cohen,  and  Thomas
Weinacht. Strong-field atomic phase matching.Phys.
Rev. Lett., 96:063603, feb 2006.
418.  Philipp  Treutlein,  Theodor  W.  H ̈ansch,  Jakob  Re-
ichel, Antonio Negretti, Markus A. Cirone, and Tom-
maso  Calarco.    Microwave  potentials  and  optimal
control for robust quantum gates on an atom chip.
Phys. Rev. A, 74:022312, aug 2006.
419.  Gabriel  Turinici.On  the  controllability  of  bilin-
ear quantum systems.  InMathematical Models and
Methods for Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry,  vol-
ume 74 ofLecture Notes in Chemistry, pages 75–92.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2000.
420.  Gabriel Turinici and Herschel Rabitz. Optimally con-
trolling the internal dynamics of a randomly oriented
ensemble  of  molecules.Phys. Rev. A,  70:063412,
2004.
421.  Pavleta Tzvetkova, Svetlana Simova, and Burkhard
Luy.   Pehsqc:  A  simple  experiment  for  simultane-
ous and sign-sensitive measurement of ((1)j(ch)+d-
ch) and ((2)j(hh)+d-hh) couplings.J. Magn. Reson.,
186(2):193–200, jun 2007.
422.  JonathanG.Underwood,MichaelSpanner,
Misha  Yu.  Ivanov,  Jeff  Mottershead,  Benjamin  J.
Sussman, and Albert Stolow.  Switched wave pack-
ets:  A  route  to  nonperturbative  quantum  control.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 90:223001, jun 2003.
423.  T Untidt, T Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen, B Luy, SJ Glaser,
C Griesinger, OW Sorensen, and NC Nielsen. Design
of nmr pulse experiments with optimum sensitivity:
coherence-order-selective transfer in i2s and i3s spin
systems.Mol. Phys., 95(5):787–796, 1998.
424.  L. Van Damme, R. Zeier, S. J. Glaser, and D. Sugny.
Application of the Pontryagin maximum principle to
the  time-optimal  control  in  a  chain  of  three  spins
with  unequal  couplings.Phys. Rev. A,  90:013409,
2014.
425.  P. van der Walle, M. T. W. Milder, L. Kuipers, and
J.  L.  Herek.   Quantum  control  experiment  reveals
solvation-induced  decoherence.Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences,  106(19):7714–7717,
2009.
426.  S.  van  Frank,  A.  Negretti,  T.  Berrada, R.  B ̈ucker,
S. Montangero, J.-F. Schaff, T. Schumm, T. Calarco,
and  J.  Schmiedmayer.Interferometry  with  non-
classical motional states of a Bose–Einstein conden-
sate.Nat. Commun., 5:4009, may 2014.
427.  L. M. K. Vandersypen and I. L. Chuang.  Nmr tech-
niques for quantum control and computation.Rev.
Mod. Phys., 76:1037, 2005.
428.  F. Verstraete, M. M. Wolf, and J. I. Cirac. Quantum
computation and quantum state engineering driven
by dissipation.Nat. Phys., 5:633–636, 2009.
429.  M. Veshtort and R. G. Griffin.  SPINEVOLUTION:
A powerful tool for the simulation of solid and liquid
state nmr  experiments.J. Magn. Reson., 178:248–
282, 2006.
430.  V. Vesterinen, O.-P. Saira, A. Bruno, and L. DiCarlo.
Mitigating  information  leakage  in  a  crowded  spec-
trum of weakly anharmonic qubits.  arXiv:1405.0450
[cond-mat.mes-hall], may 2014.
431.  A. Viale and S. Aime. Current concepts on hyperpo-
larized molecules in MRI.Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol.,
14(1):90–96, 2010.
432.  G. Vidal, K. Hammerer, and J. I. Cirac.  Interaction
cost of nonlocal gates.Phys. Rev. Lett., 88:237902,
2002.
433.  R.  Vijay,  C.  Macklin,  D.  H.  Slichter,  S.  J.  Weber,
K. W. Murch, R. Naik, A. N. Korotkov, and I. Sid-
diqi. Stabilizing Rabi oscillations in a superconduct-
ing qubit using quantum feedback.Nature, 490:77–
80, 2012.
434.  M. S. Vinding, I. I. Maximov, Z. Toˇsner, and N. Chr.
Nielsen.   Fast  numerical  design  of  spatial-selective
rf  pulses  in  mri  using  krotov  and  quasi-newton
based  optimal  control  methods.J. Chem. Phys.,
137:054203, 2012.
435.  N.  V.  Vitanov,  T.  Halfmann,  B.  W.  Shore,  and
K.  Bergmann.    Laser-induced  population  transfer
by adiabatic passage techniques.Annu. Rev. Phys.
Chem., 52:763–809, 2001.
436.  T.   Vosegaard,   C.   Kehlet,   N.   Khaneja,   S.   J.
Glaser,  and  N.  C.  Nielsen.Improved  excitation
schemes for multiple-quantum magic-angle spinning
for  quadrupolar nuclei designed  using optimal con-
trol  theory.J. Am. Chem. Soc.,  127:13768–13769,
2005.
437.  G.   Waldherr,   Y.   Wang,   S.   Zaiser,   M.   Jamali,
T.  Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen  ad  H.  Abe,  T.  Ohshima,
J.  Isoya, J.F.  Du,  P.  Neumann,  and  J.  Wrachtrup.
Quantum error correction in a solid-state hybrid spin
register.Nature, 506:204, 2014.
438.  A. Walther, B. Julsgaard, L. Rippe, Yan Ying, and
S. Kr ̈oll und R. Fisher und S. Glaser. Extracting high
fidelity  quantum  computer  hardware  from  random
Steffen J. Glaser et al.: Training Schr ̈odinger’s cat: quantum optimal control31
systems.Phys. Scr. T, 137:014009, 2009.
439.  X. Wang and S. G. Schirmer.  Analysis of lyapunov
method for control of quantum systems.IEEE Trans.
Autom. Control, 55(10):2259–2270, 2010.
440.  Xiaoting   Wang,   Abolfazl   Bayat,   Sougato   Bose,
and  Sophie  G.  Schirmer.Global  control  meth-
ods  for  Greenberger-Horne-Zeilinger-state  genera-
tion  on  a  one-dimensional  Ising  chain.Phys. Rev.
A, 82:012330, 2010.
441.  Xiaoting Wang, Abolfazl Bayat, S. G. Schirmer, and
Sougato Bose. Robust entanglement in antiferromag-
netic Heisenberg chains by single-spin optimal con-
trol.Phys. Rev. A, 81:032312, mar 2010.
442.  W. S. Warren, H. Rabitz, and M. Dahlen.  Coherent
control  of  quantum  dynamics:  The  dream  is  alive.
Science, 259(5101):1581–1589, 1993.
443.  P. Watts, J. Vala, M. M. M ̈uller, T. Calarco, K. B.
Whaley, D. M. Reich, M. H. Goerz, and C. P. Koch.
Optimizing  for  an  arbitrary  perfect  entangler:  I.
functionals.Phys. Rev. A, 91, 2015.
444.  A. M. Weiner. Femtosecond pulse shaping using spa-
tial light modulators.Rev. Sci. Instrum., 71(5):1929–
1960, 2000.
445.  J. Werschnik and E. K. U. Gross. Quantum optimal
control  theory.J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys.,
40(18):175–211, 2007.
446.  H. M. Wiseman and G. J. Milburn. Quantum theory
of  optical feedback via homodyne detection.Phys.
Rev. Lett., 70:548–551, 1993.
447.  H. M. Wiseman and G. J. Milburn.Quantum mea-
surement and control.  Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 2010.
448.  M. Wollenhaupt, V. Engel, and T. Baumert.  Fem-
tosecond laser photoelectron spectroscopy on atoms
and small molecules: Prototype studies in quantum
control.Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 56:25, 2005.
449.  Matthew J Wright, SD Gensemer, J Vala, R Kosloff,
and  PL  Gould.Control  of   ultracold  collisions
with  frequency-chirped  light.Phys. Rev. Lett.,
95(6):063001, 2005.
450.  R.-B. Wu, R. Long, J. Dominy, T.-S. Ho, and H. Ra-
bitz.   Singularities  of  quantum  control  landscapes.
Phys. Rev. A, 86:013405, 2012.
451.  Kurt  W ̈uthrich.NMR  studies  of  structure  and
function  of  biological  macromolecules  (nobel  lec-
ture).Angewandte Chemie International Edition,
42(29):3340–3363, 2003.
452.  D.  Xu,  K.  F.  King,  Y.  Zhu,  G.C.  McKinnon,  and
Z.  P.  Liang.   Designing  multichannel,  multidimen-
sional, arbitrary flip angle rf pulses using an optimal
control approach.Magn. Reson. Med.,  59:547–560,
2008.
453.  Naoki  Yamamoto.Coherent  versus  measurement
feedback: Linear systems theory for quantum infor-
mation.Phys. Rev. X, 4:041029, 2014.
454.  Y. J. Yan, R. E. Gillilan, R. M. Whitnell, K. R. Wil-
son, and S. Mukamel.  Optical control of molecular
dynamics:  Liouville-space  theory.J. Phys. Chem.,
97:2320–2333, 1993.
455.  T.  Yi-Peng,  N.  Xin-Fang,  L.  Jun,  C.  Hong-Wei,
Z. Xian-Yi, P. Xin-Hua, and Du Jiang-Feng. Prepar-
ing  pseudo-pure  states  in  a  quadrupolar  spin  sys-
tem  using  optimal  control.Chinese Phys. Lett.,
29:127601, 2012.
456.  H.  Yuan,  S.  J.  Glaser, and N.  Khaneja.  Geodesics
for efficient creation and propagation of order along
Ising spin chains.Phys. Rev. A, 76:012316, 2007.
457.  H.  Yuan  and  N.  Khaneja.    Time  optimal  control
of coupled qubits under nonstationary interactions.
Phys. Rev. A, 72(4):040301(R), 2005.
458.  H. Yuan and N. Khaneja. Efficient synthesis of quan-
tum gates on a three-spin system with triangle topol-
ogy.Phys. Rev. A, 84:062301, 2011.
459.  H.   Yuan,   D.   Wei,   Y.   Zhang,   S.   Glaser,   and
N. Khaneja. Efficient synthesis of quantum gates on
indirectly  coupled  spins.Phys. Rev. A,  89:042315,
2014.
460.  H. Yuan, R. Zeier, and N. Khaneja. Elliptic functions
and efficient control of Ising spin chains with unequal
couplings.Phys. Rev. A, 77:032340, 2008.
461.  Haidong Yuan, Christiane P. Koch, Peter Salamon,
and David J. Tannor.  Controllability on relaxation-
free  subspaces:  On  the  relationship  between  adia-
batic population transfer and optimal control.Phys.
Rev. A, 85:033417, March 2012.  arXiv:1004.4050.
462.  R. Zeier, M. Grassl, and Th. Beth.  Gate simulation
and lower bounds on the simulation time.Phys. Rev.
A, 70:032319, 2004.
463.  R. Zeier and T. Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen. Symmetry prin-
ciples in quantum systems theory.J. Math. Phys.,
52:113510, 2011.
464.  F.   Zhang,   G.   anf   Schilling,   S.   J.   Glaser,   and
C.  Hilty.   Chemical  shift  correlations  from  hyper-
polarized  NMR  using  a  single  shot.Anal. Chem.,
85:2875–2881, 2013.
465.  Y. Zhang, M. Lapert, D. Sugny, M. Braun, and S. J.
Glaser. Time-optimal control of spin 1/2 particles in
the presence of radiation damping and relaxation.J.
Chem. Phys., 134:054103, 2011.
466.  W. Zhu, J. Botina, and H. Rabitz.  Rapidly conver-
gent iteration methods for quantum optimal control
of  population.J. Chem. Phys.,  108(5):1953–1963,
1998.
467.  Z.  Zimbor ́as, R.  Zeier,  T.  Schulte-Herbr ̈uggen, and
D. Burgarth. Symmetry decides simulability of effec-
tive  interactions.   http://arxiv.org/abs/1504.07734,
2015.