Canadian Journal on Aging / La Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3) : 281 – 297   (2016)
© Canadian Association on Gerontology 2016. This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted re-use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
doi:10.1017/S0714980816000301  
281
    *         We thank the following individuals for their critical review of the manuscript and insightful suggestions (listed in alphabet-
ical order): Lisa Ashley, Janet Craik, Wendy Duggleby, Suzanne Dupuis-Blanchard, Catherine Freeze, Joanne Goldberg, 
            Screening for Frailty in Canada’s Health 
Care System: A Time for Action* 
       John     Muscedere   ,   
1
          Melissa K.     Andrew   ,   
2
         Sean M.     Bagshaw   ,   
3
         Carole     Estabrooks   ,   
4
         David     Hogan   ,   
5
    Jayna     Holroyd-Leduc   ,   
6
         Susan     Howlett   ,   
7
         William     Lahey   ,   
8
         Colleen     Maxwell   ,   
9
         Mary     McNally   ,   
10
    Paige     Moorhouse   ,   
2
         Kenneth     Rockwood   ,   
2
         Darryl     Rolfson   ,   
11
         Samir     Sinha   ,   
12
     and     Bill     Tholl   ,   
13
        for the 
Canadian Frailty Network (CFN)   
  RÉSUMÉ 
 Avec le vieillissement de la population canadienne, la fragilité – avec son risque accru du déclin fonctionnel, la détérioration 
de la santé, et le décès – devient de plus en plus répandue. La physiologie de la fragilité refl  ète son origine parmi organes 
et  systèmes  multiples.  Environ  un  quart  des  Canadiens  qui  sont  âgés  de  plus  de  65  sont  fragiles,  augmentant  à  plus  de  la  
moitié de ceux âgés de plus de 85. Notre système de soins de santé est organisé pour gérer les systèmes mono-organes, ce 
qui nuit à notre capacité à traiter effi cacement les personnes atteintes de troubles multiples et des limitations fonctionnelles. 
Pour faire face à la fragilité, il faut reconnaître quand elle se produit, accroître la sensibilisation à son importance, développer 
des modèles holistiques pour ses soins, et générer des meilleures preuves pour son traitement. La reconnaissance de la 
façon dont la fragilité impacte la durée de vie permettrait l’intégration des objectifs en matière de soins dans les options de 
traitement. Les différents organisations de soins responsables variées dans le système de soins de santé canadien nécessiteront 
des stratégies et outils différentes pour évaluer la fragilité. Les changements dans la politique sera essentiels, étant donné la 
portée et la complexité des défi s que pose la fragilité au système de soins de santé comme cela est organisé actuellement.   
 ABSTRACT 
 As Canada’s population ages, frailty – with its increased risk of functional decline, deterioration in health status, and 
death  –  will  become  increasingly  common.  The  physiology  of  frailty  refl  ects  its  multisystem,  multi-organ  origins.  
About a quarter of Canadians over age 65 are frail, increasing to over half in those older than 85. Our health care system 
is organized around single-organ systems, impairing our ability to effectively treat people having multiple disorders 
and functional limitations. To address frailty, we must recognize when it occurs, increase awareness of its signifi cance, 
develop  holistic  models  of  care,  and  generate  better  evidence  for  its  treatment.  Recognizing  how  frailty  impacts  
lifespan will allow for integration of care goals into treatment options. Different settings in the Canadian health care 
system will require different strategies and tools to assess frailty. Given the magnitude of challenges frailty poses for 
the health care system as currently organized, policy changes will be essential.  
1
          Department  of  Medicine ,   Queens  University  
2
          Division  of  Geriatric  Medicine ,   Dalhousie  University  
3
          Division  of  Critical  Care  Medicine ,   University  of  Alberta  
4
          Faculty  of  Nursing ,   University  of  Alberta  
5
          Cumming  School  of  Medicine ,   University  of  Calgary  
6
         Departments of Medicine and Community Health Sciences ,  University of Calgary  
7
          Pharmacology  and  Medicine  (Geriatric  Medicine) ,   Dalhousie  University  
8
         Schulich School of Law and the School of Health Administration ,  Dalhousie University  
9
         Schools of Pharmacy and Public Health & Health Systems ,  University of Waterloo  
10
         Faculties  of  Dentistry  and  Medicine ,   Dalhousie  University  
11
         Department  of  Medicine ,   University  of  Alberta  
12
        Department of Medicine and Family and Community Medicine and the Institute of Health Policy ,  Management and Evalua-
tion ,  University of Toronto  
13
         President  and  CEO  of  HealthCareCAN ,   Ottawa  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 282      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
     Frailty is increasingly common in the aging Canadian 
population  but  is  under-recognized,  and  its  impact  is  
under-appreciated.  It  is  estimated  that  over  1  million  
Canadians  are  frail  (Hoover,  Roterman,  Sanmartin,  &  
Bernier,    2013  ),  but  the  health  care  system  is  poorly  
designed  for  improving  the  health  outcomes  of  those  
who  are  frail.  By  systematically  recognizing  frailty,  
we can implement care processes to meet this growing 
societal  and  health  problem.  Herein  we  discuss  the  
concept of frailty, methods to measure it, its biological 
underpinnings, and how frailty can be assessed and 
addressed  in  the  sectors  of  the  Canadian  health  care  
system, along with the societal, legal, ethical, and policy 
issues linked to frailty and its identifi cation. 
  Although  the  risk  of  death  increases  with  age,  not  
everyone of the same age has the same risk of dying. 
This observation led to the concept of frailty. People at 
a  particular  age  who,  in  consequence  of  multisystem  
impairments, are at higher risk of dying are said to be 
 frail  while those at lower risk are said to be  fi t   (Clegg, 
Young,  Iliffe,  Rikkert,  &  Rockwood,    2013  ).  Clinical  
frailty can occur at any age and has been documented 
in teenagers with congenital and acquired multisystem 
illness  (Brothers  et  al.,    2014  ;  Rockwood,  MacDonald,  
Sutton,  Rockwood,  Baron,  &  Canadian  Scleroderma  
Research  Group,  2014;  Rockwood,  Song,  &  Mitniski,  
  2011  ;  Schoufour,  Evenhuis,  &  Echteld,    2014  ).  Given  
that  we  accumulate  cellular  and  sub-cellular  damage  
with age (López-Otín, Blasco, Partridge, Serrano, & 
Kroemer,    2013  ),  frailty  most  often  occurs  in  people  
older than 65 years (Buckinx et al.,  2015 ; Clegg et al., 
  2013  ).  The  increasing  extent  of  multisystem  disease  
and resulting frailty with age is a challenge for research 
in aging (Buth, Gainer, Legare, & Hirsch,  2014 ; Oliver, 
 2014 ) and for health care in general (Oliver,  2014 ). 
 Modern health care came into being when the popula-
tion’s median age was in the 20s and when a large frac-
tion  of  people  died  relatively  young  of  single-system  
illness. This contrasts with the present reality of many 
older adults with multiple, interacting, active medical 
and social problems, and challenges the medical system 
which is largely organized around single-organ dis-
eases. As a result, health care systems must restruc-
ture to deal with frailty and meet the needs of the aged 
on  more  holistic  terms  (Buth  et  al.,    2014  ;  Clegg  et  al.,  
 2013 ;  Gordon & Oliver,  2015 ; Oliver,  2014 ; Silvester, 
Mohammed,  Harriman,  Girolami,  &  Downes,    2014  ;  
Turner  &  Clegg,    2014  ).  Restructuring  will  need  to  
include empowering health practitioners with basic 
skills for managing syndromes that are common in frail 
older adults through adequate training during either 
primary  certifi  cation  and/or  continuing  education.  
All clinicians  and  physicians  should  be  competent  to  
manage multisystem impairment, falls, delirium, func-
tional decline, and social abandonment found in frailty 
(Carlson, Merel, & Yukawa,  2015 ; Clegg et al.,  2013 ). 
  Despite  the  growing  and  fundamental  challenge  of  
frailty,  researchers  disagree  on  whether  frailty  is  a  
 syndrome    (physical  and/or  cognitive)  or  a  broadly  
defi ned  state  (Buckinx et al.,  2015 ; Clegg et al.,  2013 ; 
Kelaiditi et al.,  2013 ; Morley et al.,  2013 ; Rodríguez-
Mañas et al.,  2013 ). However, strong agreement on the 
need  to  identify  frailty  comes  from  the  importance  
of understanding risk for health care providers. The 
question of which tools to identify frailty might best be 
employed in any particular environment is still open 
(Clegg,  Rogers,  &  Young,    2015  ;  Morley  et  al.,    2013  ;  
Rodríguez-Mañas  et  al.,    2013  ),  but  the  most  widely  
used tools have much in common (Theou, Brothers, 
Peña, Mitnitski, & Rockwood,  2014 ). 
 Although it has been argued that the lack of effective 
interventions for frailty precludes screening, its recog-
nition can increase awareness of a patient’s heightened 
vulnerability, allow for institution of appropriate care 
plans, and allow for newly emerging evidence for the 
treatment  of  those  who  are  frail  to  be  readily  imple-
mented. The ultimate goal is to develop a care plan 
that is appropriate for the person. In general, screening 
  Manuscript  received:  /  manuscrit  reçu  :     11  /  11  /    15  
 Manuscript  accepted:  /  manuscrit  accepté  :     01  /  03  /    16   
  Mots clés :      vieillissement  ,    évaluation  ,    fragilité  ,    système  de  santé  ,    résultats  ,    de  dépistage   
 Keywords:       aging  ,    assessment  ,    frailty  ,    health  care  system  ,    outcomes  ,    screening      
  La correspondance et les demenades de tire-à-part doivent être adressées à: / Correspondence and requests for offprints 
should be sent to: 
John Muscedere, MD, FRCPC 
Queen’s University – Critical Care Medicine 
76 Stuart Street 
Kingston, ON K7L 2V7 
( muscedej@kgh.kari.net )  
John Hirdes, Yves Joanette, Gill Lewin, Joanne Lynn, Heather Keller, Rob Lam, Marilyn Macdonald, and Walter Wodchis. 
We would also like to thank Cathy McPhalen, Denis Abbott, Carol Barrie, and Perry Kim for editorial review of the manuscript. 
The Canadian Frailty Network is funded by the Networks of Centres of Excellence of Canada. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      283 
occurs  in  three  contexts:  (1)  for  specifi c  populations 
(Buckinx et al.,  2015 ; Clegg et al.,  2013 ); (2) at times of 
unanticipated health care needs such as in emergency 
departments  (Carpenter  et  al.,    2015  )  or  pre-hospital  
care (Goldstein et al.,  2015 ); and (3) before elective pro-
cedures  (Handforth  et  al.,    2014  ;  Sepehri  et  al.,    2014  ).  
Screening is a prelude to assessment and care plan-
ning, and in many settings is modelled on informa-
tion  gathered  as  part  of  a    comprehensive  geriatric  
assessment  (CGA) (Goldstein et al.,  2015 ; Jones, Song, & 
Rockwood,  2004 ; Joseph et al.,  2014 ; Jung et al.,  2014 ; 
Kenig,  Zychiewicz,  Olszewska,  &  Richter,    2015  ;  Patel  
et al.,  2014 ; Pilotto et al.,  2008 ; Subra, Gillette-Guyonnet, 
Cesari,  Oustric,  &  Vellas,    2012  ).  The  line  between  
screening and assessment blurs when frailty tools are 
generated automatically from health care records. Such 
tools  can  grade  degrees  of  frailty  and  quantitate  the  
number  of  diseases  and  impairments  present  but  are  
not  detailed  enough  for  the  generation  of  a  care  plan  
(Drubbel et al.,  2014 ; Hubbard et al.,  2015 ).  
 Frailty Screening Tools 
  The  term    frailty    is  often  used  imprecisely,  but  with  
agreement  on  its  meaning  and  measurement  the  con-
cept of frailty can powerfully inform researchers, care 
providers,  families,  and  individuals  (de  Vries  et  al.,  
 2011 ). The two essential features of frailty are risk due 
to instability and multidimensionality. 
 Tools for detecting frailty can be used at a single time 
point or for evaluation over time. In a clinical context, 
a commonly referenced standard for the detection of 
frailty  is  the  opinion  of  experts  following  a  CGA  
(Rockwood,  Silvius,  &  Fox,    1998  ).  Such  a  standard  
emphasizes  the  multidimensional  and  heterogeneous  
nature  of  frailty,  the  underlying  systems  affected,  
and  frailty’s  expression  as  geriatric  syndromes.  In  
evaluating frailty, we are interested in the  predictive  
value of a tool. The relationship between the degree 
of frailty and the risk of death and adverse outcomes 
over  time  has  been  demonstrated  with  many  com-
monly used tools (de Vries et al.,  2011 ). 
  One  approach  to  measuring  frailty  is  to  use  records  
already  available  in  databases.  The  Frailty  Index  (FI),  
which emphasizes accumulation of defi  cits, has proven 
to  be  very  fl  exible  in  this  regard  (Jones  et  al.,    2004  ).  
Frailty tools that are built into clinical datasets should 
be validated for use by non-specialists, require no spe-
cial  equipment,  and  be  easy  to  implement.  However,  
trade-offs may be needed in moving towards tools that 
are acceptable and easy to apply in clinical settings. As 
the number of factors is reduced, comprehensiveness, 
generalizability, and clinically useful information may 
be compromised. For example, the phenotype model of 
frailty includes only fi ve items and excludes a number 
of variables thought to be important in frailty, such as 
cognition, mood, social support, and self-rated health. 
That  model  also  obliges  testing  for  grip  strength  and  
walking speed, which may not be feasible or informa-
tive in some settings (Fried et al.,  2001 ). 
 Practical considerations may infl uence the specifi cs of 
the implementation of frailty screening in the Canadian 
population.  Using  only  tools  based  on  a  prior  CGA  
may  not  be  feasible  (Clegg  et  al.,    2013  ).  A  number  of  
candidate  tools  for  screening  are  available  including  
the  frailty  phenotype  model  itself  (Fried  et  al.,    2001  ),  
the  Clinical  Frailty  Scale  (Rockwood  et  al.,    2005  ),  the  
Edmonton  Frail  Scale  (Rolfson,  Majumdar,  Tsuyuki,  
Tahir,  &  Rockwood,    2006  ),  Groningen  Frailty  Indi-
cator (Steverink, Slaets, Schuurmans, & van Lis ,  2001 ), 
Tilburg  Frailty  Indicator  (Gobbens,  van  Assen,  Lijkx,  
Wijnen-Sponselee,  &  Schols,    2010  ),  PRISMA  7,  gait  
speed,  hand  grip  strength,  and  Timed  Up  and  Go  
(Hoogendijk et al.,  2013 ). A recent systematic review of 
simple  tools  for  identifying  frailty  in  community-
dwelling older adults demonstrated that only a few of 
these  have  been  validated  against  criterion  standards  
such  as  the  FI,  frailty  phenotype  model,  and  CGA  
(Clegg et al.,  2015 ). Even so, commonly used frontline 
frailty  tools  appear  to  share  the  characteristics  of  a  
non-linear increase in score with age, increasing mor-
tality with increased level of frailty, and age differences 
in prevalence of frailty (Theou et al.,  2014 ).   
 Biology of Frailty 
  Insights  into  the  biology  of  frailty  come  from  both  
human and preclinical models. Laboratory research 
into frailty as a syndrome aligns closely with research 
on age-related skeletal muscle wasting (sarcopenia) 
in humans. This research usually employs models of 
chronic  infl  ammation  (Rennick  &  Fort,    2000  )  that  
mimic  the  infl  ammation  often  present  in  frail  older  
humans  (Akki  et  al.,    2014  ;  Walston  et  al.,    2008  ).  
Measures of physical performance in aging mice have 
been used to develop a frailty syndrome scoring system 
(Liu, Graber, Ferguson-Stegall, & Thompson,  2014 ). 
Others have developed animal models of frailty as a 
state in aging mice, using both invasive (Parks et al., 
  2012  )  and  observational/clinical  means  (Feridooni,  
Sun, Rockwood, & Howlett,  2014 ; Kane et al.,  2015 ; 
Whitehead et al.,  2014 ). By tracking age-related defi cit 
accumulation,  they  have  created  a  mouse  FI  (Jones  
et al.,  2004 ). This FI is related to age in mice in a fashion 
similar  to  a  human  FI  (Woo,  Tang,  Suen,  Leung,  &  
Leung,  2008 ). Of particular note, longevity interven-
tions  such  as  caloric  restriction  and  treatment  with  
resveratrol lower FI scores in treated mice (Howlett, 
Rockwood,  Mitnitski,  &  Rockwood,    2014  ).  These  
mouse  models  of  frailty  will  accelerate  our  under-
standing of frailty and help us develop interventions. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 284      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
  Human  studies  identify  several  potential  mechanisms  
for  frailty  including  immune  dysfunction,  oxidative  
stress in metabolism, and shortening of telomeres (Clegg 
et al.,  2013 ; Zaslavsky et al.,  2013 ). Although human 
telomere length on its own does not correlate well with 
frailty (Brault et al.,  2014 ; Collerton et al.,  2012 ; Saum 
et  al.,    2014  );  Woo  et  al.,    2008  ),  telomere  length  com-
bined with other biomarkers complements the clinical 
FI in predicting risk of death (Mitnitski et al.,  2015 ). 
 Recent reports have described using out-of-range abnor-
malities in common blood tests (Rockwood, MacMillan, 
Mitnitski, & Howlett,  2015 ) in a measure of frailty called 
the  FI-LAB  which  has  properties  very  similar  to  a  
clinical FI.  FI-LAB  scores  increase  with  age  and  higher  
scores are related to higher mortality. Even among people 
with  low  clinical  FI  scores,  accumulated  laboratory  
measures are linked to increased risk of death. Although 
much more work needs to be done to elucidate the bio-
chemical and physiological basis of frailty, it is important 
to recognize that frailty is not just a clinical construct.   
 Screening for Frailty within the Sectors of 
the Canadian Health Care System 
 Different settings in the Canadian health care system – 
including  primary  care  and  ambulatory  care,  assisted  
living, long-term care homes, acute care, and critical 
care  –  will  require  different  strategies  and  tools  to  
screen for frailty.  
 Primary and Ambulatory Care 
  The  growing  prevalence  of  frailty  and  its  clinical  vari-
ability is most evident in primary and ambulatory care. 
Primary  care  providers  often  encounter  frailty  and  its  
myriad  challenges  including  acute  health  crises,  mul-
tiple chronic co-morbid diseases, and functional impair-
ments. Frailty increases the role and demand for home 
support, and requires help from family caregivers who 
may also be experiencing frailty (Sinha,  2012 ). 
 Primary care providers are ideally situated to incorpo-
rate  the  concept  of  frailty  into  their  practice.  Recog-
nizing frailty in primary care is hindered, however, by 
its insidious onset and progression, our single-system 
disease model, and clinicians mistaking clinical frailty 
for  normal  aging  (Lee,  Heckman,  &  Molnar,    2015  ).  
Cognitive  impairment  and  dementia  are  important  
drivers of frailty (Robertson, Savva, & Kenny,  2013 ) 
and are similarly under-recognized in primary care, 
further compounding the challenges to routinely assess 
and respond to frailty. For example, most screening 
tools for frailty rely on self-reported defi cits in func-
tion or health. This method is widely understood to 
be unreliable for people with cognitive impairment 
(Debettignies, Mahurin, & Pirozzolo,  1990 ). 
  Tools  to  routinely  identify  and  measure  frailty  in  pri-
mary  and  ambulatory  care  settings  are  emerging  
(Lee et al.,  2015 ), but no consensus has been reached 
on  which  tools  should  be  used  (Theou,  Brothers,  
Mitnitski,  &  Rockwood,    2013  ).  Selecting  an  optimal  
tool or tools depends on the primary goal since many 
of  the  frailty  screening  tools  have  been  validated  on  
specifi c outcomes. For example, screening designed to 
inform  programs  and  policy  may  best  use  existing  
electronic  health  record  data  or  administrative  data.  
Although walking speed has been validated as a single-
item screening tool for frailty (Abellan van Kan et al., 
 2009 ), screening tools may be more clinically useful if 
they identify an individual’s multidimensional drivers 
of  frailty  (Mallery  et  al.,    2014  )  and  build  capacity  for  
primary  and  other  ambulatory  care  providers  to  
respond to individualized needs. 
 Once frailty is recognized, opportunities abound for 
appropriately  targeted  interventions  such  as  CGAs  
(Stuck,  Siu,  Wieland,  Adams,  &  Rubenstein,    1993  ),  
medication review, exercise prescription, home care 
programs, or programs that augment decision-making 
(Moorhouse & Mallery,  2012 ). Any contemplated inter-
vention will,  however,  need  to  be  evidence-based,  
sustainable, and tailored to the time constraints and 
environment of primary and other ambulatory care 
providers.   
 Assisted Living 
  Assisted  living  is  an  expanding  housing  and  care  
option for older people who need a protective envi-
ronment that can offer increased supervision and assis-
tance with activities of daily living. Across Canada, 
assisted  living  facilities  show  a  good  deal  of  vari-
ability  in  their  admission  policies  and  staffi ng.  In 
general,  assisted  living  residents  tend  to  be  less  dis-
abled than those in long-term care, but the characteris-
tics  of  residents  overlap  in  these  two  settings  (Strain,  
Maxwell, Wanless, Gilbart, & Alberta Continuing Care 
Epidemiological  Studies  [ACCES]  Research  Group,  
 2015 ). 
 Assisted living is frequently said to cater to frail older 
adults,  but  few  studies  report  on  the  proportion  of  
assisted  living  residents  who  are  frail  (Freiheit  et  al.,  
 2011 ; Hogan et al.,  2012 ; Kanwar et al.,  2013 ; Nichols, 
Varadarajan,  Bock,  &  Blumin,    2015  ).  In  those  that  do,  
frailty  is  common  however  defi  ned  (Kanwar  et  al.,  
 2013 ), but in comparison, frailty is generally felt to be 
more common and/or severe in long-term care homes 
(Nichols  et  al.,    2015  ).  Different  approaches  for  detect-
ing frailty among assisted living residents may lead to 
differing  prevalence  estimates.  A  study  comparing  
three  ways  of  operationalizing  frailty  (i.e.,  two  frailty  
indices  and  Cardiovascular  Health  Study  criteria)  in  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      285 
this population reported a nearly twofold (28.7% to 
52.3%)  variation  in  prevalence  (Hogan  et  al.,    2012  ).  
Because of the high levels of cognitive and physical 
impairment found in this population, performance-
based  frailty  criteria  such  as  gait  speed  and  grip  
strength  can  be  diffi  cult  to  measure  (Freiheit  et  al.,  
 2011 ). 
 In view of its high prevalence in this setting, a rea-
sonable  approach  would  be  to  view  all  assisted  
living residents as frail. It is unclear whether identi-
fying  the  frailest  among  assisted  living  residents  
substantially helps pick out those at higher risk for 
adverse outcomes or can be used to direct their care. 
Predictive  models  improve  only  modestly  in  their  
ability to anticipate adverse outcomes like mortality, 
hospitalization, and moving to a higher level of care 
when frailty is added to characteristics such as age, 
sex,  and  co-morbidity  (Hogan  et  al.,    2012  ;  Nichols  
et  al.,    2015  ).  All  residents  in  assisted  living  would  
benefi t from a number of the approaches advocated 
for frail individuals such as advance care planning, 
encouraging  physical  activity,  and  careful  steward-
ship of medications.   
 Long-term Care Homes 
 In Canada, at any given time, 350,000 adults older than 
65 years of age live in long-term care homes (Statistics 
Canada,    2011  ).  With  greater  community  and  home  
services  that  support  older  adults  longer  in-place,  
people increasingly enter long-term care homes with 
far  more  advanced  disease.  Sixty  per  cent  of  long-
term  care  residents  have  multiple  signifi cant diseases 
(Doupe et al.,  2012 ), and 70 per cent have age-related 
dementia  (Canadian  Study  of  Health  and  Aging  
Working Group,  1994 ; Doupe et al.,  2006 ; Doupe et al., 
 2011 ; Gruber-Baldini et al.,  2009 ). Almost half (45%) 
of Canadians in long-term care homes are over age 80 
(Ramage-Morin,  2005;  Statistics  Canada,    2001  ).  Over-
all, long-term care homes in Canada are (very) late-life 
and end-of-life settings. There is universal agreement 
that residents are a frail or potentially frail group of 
vulnerable older adults. 
 The   benefi  ts  of  frailty  screening  in  long-term  care  
homes may differ from other settings, and the goal of 
frailty  screening  has  not  been  settled  –  whether  to  
identify it or to serve as catalyst to measure its severity. 
Long-term  care  settings  aspire  to  focus  on  preserving  
and enhancing quality of life in very late life (Brownie & 
Nancarrow,  2013 ), while keeping in mind resident and 
family goals of care and wishes about death and dying. 
These include trying to prevent premature loss of func-
tion, use of non-benefi  cial interventions, and avoidable 
hospitalization. In this regard, frailty scores may sup-
port advance care planning. 
  Evidence  from  long-term  care  settings  reveals  that  
higher frailty scores are linked to increases in hospi-
talization,  emergency  department  visits,  new-onset  
depression (Gonzalez-Vaca et al.,  2014 ), incident dis-
ability (Rockwood, Abeysundera, & Mitnitski,  2007 ), 
cognitive  decline  (Rockwood  et  al.,    2007  ),  greater  
risk  of  death  (when  combined  with  cognitive  dys-
function (Matusik et al.,  2012 ; Rockwood et al.,  2007 ; 
Tabue-Teguo et al.,  2015 ), and poorer health-related 
quality of life (Kanwar et al.,  2013 ). 
 Although the CGA is the gold standard to detect frailty, 
it is unlikely to be widely adopted in long-term care 
settings  in  Canada  given  the  few  specialist  health  
care  professionals  available.  However,  in  a  recent  
study, its successful implementation within long-term 
care  did  improve  care  for  frail  residents  (Marshall,  
Clarke, Varatharasan, & Andrew,  2015 ). Long-term care 
screening for frailty could use existing data such as 
the  routinely  collected  RAI-Minimum  Data  Set  2.0  
(RAI-MDS  2.0  [Hirdes,  Mitchell,  Maxwell  &  White,  
 2011 ; Hubbard et al.,  2015 ]) or the new interRAI LTC 
assessment.  Measures  of  defi  cits  accumulated  by  
older  adults  (Clegg  et  al.,    2013  ;  Rockwood,    2005b  ;  
Rockwood,  2005c ; Rockwood et al.,  2007 ; Rockwood 
et  al.,    2005  )  have  been  derived  from  the  RAI-MDS  
2.0  and  used  in  long-term  care  (Tabue-Teguo  et  al.,  
 2015 ). Such measures can be derived using available 
algorithms (Armstrong, Stolee, Hirdes, & Poss,  2010 ; 
Searle,  Mitnitski,  Gahbauer,  Gill,  &  Rockwood,    2008  ),  
and  higher  scores  on  three  frailty  scales  using  RAI  
data are linked to increased risk of adverse outcomes 
(Armstrong  et  al.,    2010  ).  The  three  scales  are  as  fol-
lows: (1) the interRAI CHESS (Changes in Health, End-
Stage Disease and Signs and Symptoms) Scale (Hirdes, 
Frijters, & Teare,  2003 ), (2) the Edmonton Frailty Scale, 
and (3) the cumulative defi  cits FI. In particular, CHESS 
has been found to be predictive of mortality in patients 
with neurological disease and in those with heart fail-
ure  (Hirdes,  Poss,  Mitchell,  Korngut,  &  Heckman,  
 2014 ; Tjam et al.,  2012 ). 
 Measures derived from the frailty phenotype model 
(Fried  et  al.,    2001  )  assess  fi  ve  items:  unintentional  
weight  loss,  self-reported  exhaustion,  low  energy  
expenditure, slow gait speed, and weak grip strength 
(Clegg et al.,  2013 ; Fried et al.,  2001 ). Some of these 
items are readily obtained from long-term care resi-
dents, but others may not be feasible in a population 
with signifi  cant levels of dementia. Other measures that 
have been used specifi  cally in long-term care studies 
include the Cardiovascular Health Survey (Rockwood 
et al.,  2007 ), the Canadian Study of Health and Aging 
Clinical  Frailty  Scale  (Matusik  et  al.,    2012  ;  Rockwood  
et al.,  2007 ), the Frailty Index (Rockwood et al.,  2007 ; 
Tabue-Teguo et al.,  2015 ), and walking speed (Kanwar 
et al.,  2013 ). The FRAIL-NH tool (Kaehr, Visvanathan, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 286      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
Malmstrom, & Morley,  2015 ) was reported recently and 
is  promising  for  easy,  inexpensive,  and  quick  use  in  
long-term care. It examines fatigue, resistance (ability 
to self-transfer), ambulation, incontinence or illness 
(number  of  medications),  weight  loss,  nutrition,  and  
help with dressing. 
  Clinicians,  researchers,  and  administrators  may  each  
have  different  objectives  that  determine  their  most  
appropriate  tool  or  method  to  measure  frailty.  Given  
that  nearly  all  residents  in  residential  long-term  care  
settings are not only frail but extremely frail, the use of 
such  a  tool,  whether  for  screening  or  measurement,  
needs thoughtful assessment. In all cases, though, the 
overriding  objective  must  be  improved  quality  of  life  
for these vulnerable older adults. 
 Possible interventions to reduce the severity or preva-
lence  of  frailty  are  the  same  in  long-term  care  as  in  
other settings. These fall into the general areas of nutri-
tion,  mobility,  treating  depression,  appropriate  medi-
cation  prescription,  managing  functional  losses,  and  
addressing  social,  psychological,  and  spiritual  deter-
minants of well-being. However, interventions need to 
be adapted to the care goals of the resident and family, 
the setting, and the unique characteristics of the popu-
lation.  Underlying  any  contemplated  screening  is  an  
urgent need for both research and policy development 
on models of staffi  ng in long-term care homes that will 
support screening and interventions for frailty.   
 Acute Care 
  Although  older  Canadians  are  a  small  (but  growing)  
proportion of the population, they are among the great-
est  users  of  acute  care  services.  Approximately  40  per  
cent  of  overall  hospital  admissions  are  for  older  
Canadians,  and  their  longer  stays  in  hospital  account  
for  up  to  60  per  cent  of  overall  in-patient  bed  days  
(Canadian  Institute  for  Health  Information,    2011  ).  The  
great heterogeneity among older adults in hospital set-
tings is under-appreciated, as is the impact of that het-
erogeneity  on  their  specifi  c  use  of  acute  care  services.  
Studies  of  hospitalization  patterns  consistently  show  
that  only  a  small  proportion  of  older  adults  are  high  
users  of  acute  care  services.  Those  users  tend  to  have  
multiple  chronic  conditions,  at  least  one  functional  
impairment, and inadequate social supports at home 
(Wolinsky, Stump, & Johnson,  1995 ). Moreover, these 
patients, who tend to have age-related defi cits across 
many systems, are at particular risk for adverse out-
comes  when  hospitalized,  such  as  falls,  delirium,  
drug interactions, functional decline, institutionaliza-
tion, and death (Costa & Hirdes,  2010 ; Sinha, Oakes, 
Suh, & Chaudhry,  2014 ). 
 Most older adults admitted to hospital are somewhat 
frail (Buth et al.,  2014 ; Carlson et al.,  2015 ; de Vries 
et al.,  2011 ; Gordon & Oliver,  2015 ; Joosten, Demuynck, 
Detroyer, & Milisen,  2014 ; Jung et al.,  2014 ; Kenig et al., 
 2015 ; Oliver,  2014 ; Patel et al.,  2014 ), and almost half 
experience a decline in their functional abilities in the 
weeks before their admission. By discharge, over one 
third are still functioning below their pre-decline level, 
and  half  either  do  not  recover  the  lost  function  or  
acquire new disability (Covinsky, Pierluissi, & Johnston, 
 2011 ). These poor outcomes arise from complex inter-
actions of normal age-related changes, higher rates of 
multiple diseases or illnesses, functional impairments, 
simultaneous use of multiple medications, and longer 
hospitalizations  that  increase  the  risk  of  hospital-
acquired infections (Brennan et al.,  1991 ). Many adverse 
outcomes from acute care hospitalizations are prevent-
able.  Screening  proactively  and  early  for  factors  con-
tributing  to  adverse  outcomes  and  their  related  risks  
can prevent those outcomes. 
  Evidence-based  screening  tools  have  emerged  in  
the  past  decade  to  quickly  and  effectively  identify  
older adults in the emergency department who are at 
increased risk of adverse outcomes. Examples include 
Identifi  cation of Seniors at Risk, the interRAI Assessment 
Urgency Algorithm or interRAI Emergency Depart-
ment Screener, the Clinical Frailty Scale (Costa et al., 
 2014 ; Gray et al.,  2013 ; Hirdes et al., 2009; McCusker 
et al.,  1999 ; Wallis, Wall, Biram, & Romero-Ortuno,  2015 ), 
and the Frailty Index as derived from the interRAI Acute 
Care Assessment System (Hubbard et al.,  2015 ). 
 Older patients admitted electively to hospital, most 
often for surgery, are also at potential risk for adverse 
outcomes.  Recognizing  this,  major  efforts  over  the  
past decade have been put into evidence-based tools 
and guidelines to screen for risk before, during, and 
after surgery (Chow, Rosenthal, Merkow, Ko, & Esnaola, 
  2012  ).  In  particular,  validated  screening  tools  to  
accurately assess an older patient’s risk of delirium 
are  a  key  step  forward  (Marcantonio  et  al.,    1994  ;  
Rudolph et al.,  2009 ). Clinicians fail to recognize and 
address postoperative delirium in up to 80 per cent 
of cases (Marcantonio,  2012 ) although it is a compli-
cation  in  up  to  50  per  cent  of  major  operations  for  
older adults. 
  Screening  tools  should  not  be  used  in  isolation  but  
rather  should  be  embedded  in  proactive  systems  of  
care that support immediate action. This would allow 
for implementation of care plans or strategies that min-
imize the risk inherent with an individual’s degree of 
frailty.  Specifi  c  follow-up  actions  can  include  more-
formal in-depth evaluation, implementation of care 
plans that reduce the risk of adverse outcomes such as 
delirium  or  falls,  and  referrals  to  appropriate  health  
and  social  services.  Emphasizing  early  risk  screening  
and intervention will lead to signifi cant improvements 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      287 
in  patient  and  system  outcomes  (Sinha,  Bessman,  
Flomenbaum, & Leff,  2011 ; Sinha et al.,  2014 ).   
 Critical Care 
 Frailty among people admitted to intensive care units 
(ICUs) has had little evaluation (Bagshaw et al.,  2015 ; 
Bagshaw  et  al.,    2014  ;  Le  Maguet  et  al.,    2014  ).  Critical  
illness  can  be  a  sentinel  event  for  transition  to  a  frail  
state, and frailty may also be a key unrecognized factor 
that  impedes  recovery  and  function  in  those  who  are  
critically ill (McDermid, Stelfox, & Bagshaw,  2011 ). 
 Although ICUs are data-rich environments, gathering 
data  on  how  older  adults  functioned  before  their  ill-
ness has not been a priority. Such data are essential to 
understanding  frailty  before  ICU  admission.  Ascer-
taining  frailty  in  critical  illness  is  further  complicated  
by the belief that many validated tools and instruments 
for measuring frailty are impractical for routine use in 
ICUs.  Tools  may  be  exceedingly  detailed  (70-item  FI;  
Mitnitski,  Mogilner,  MacKnight,  &  Rockwood,    2002  ),  
or require clinical data analogous to an FI-CGA (Jones, 
Song, Mitnitski, & Rockwood,  2005 ), or require special-
ized training. In critically ill people, surrogate indica-
tors of a pre-existing frail state have been used, such 
as  pre-admission  cognitive  impairment,  residence  in  
a long-term care home, or active cancer or rapidly fatal 
disease  (Garrouste-Orgeas  et  al.,    2009  ;  Rodríguez-
Mañas et al.,  2013 ; Sligl, Eurich, Marrie, & Majumdar, 
 2011 ). 
  Much  of  the  work  studying  frailty  in  ICUs  has  been  
conducted  in  Canada.  A  recent  multicentre  study  
examined the prevalence of frailty, its clinical features, 
and  outcomes  in  a  heterogeneous  group  of  patients  
admitted to six ICUs (Bagshaw et al.,  2015 ; Bagshaw 
et al.,  2014 ). Researchers used the Clinical Frailty Scale 
because  it  is  relatively  simple  and  likely  to  be  more  
reproducible,  usable,  and  applicable  in  critical  care  
settings  than  other  validated  tools  (Rockwood  et  al.,  
 2005 ). Frailty was common among these ICU patients, 
with  33  per  cent  classifi  ed  as  frail  and  another  32  per  
cent  classifi  ed  as  vulnerable.  Frail  people  were  more  
likely to suffer adverse events and have longer stays 
in  ICU  and  hospital.  Their  probability  of  in-hospital  
death was almost double that of non-frail people. Frail 
survivors of critical illness were more likely to develop 
new  disabilities  or  to  require  re-hospitalization,  were  
less likely to return home, and suffered worse quality 
of life. Another Canadian study enrolling ICU patients 
over  the  age  of  80  found  that  a  frailty  index  derived  
from a questionnaire modelled on a CGA (Goldstein 
et al.,  2015 ) improved predictions of adverse outcomes 
(Goldstein  et  al.,    2015  ;  Heyland  et  al.,    2015  ).  These  
fi  ndings  clearly  articulate  the  independent  implica-
tions of frailty for care processes and transitions, use of 
health resources, and long-term recovery by survivors 
of critical illness (Bagshaw et al.,  2015 ; Bagshaw et al., 
 2014 ) and demonstrate that frailty can be measured in 
real time across a range of ICUs (Bagshaw et al.,  2014 ). 
  However,  these  studies  also  highlight  gaps  in  knowl-
edge about frail ICU patients. We do not know enough 
about  their  nuanced  and  specialized  care  needs,  their  
use of health resources, the challenges in transitioning 
them  to  care  on  wards  and  out  of  hospital,  and  their  
specialized rehabilitation needs. These knowledge gaps 
may  explain  why  some  seemingly  logical  strategies  
across ICUs, such as interventions to optimize rehabil-
itation and nutrition, have not improved outcomes for 
patients (Walsh et al.,  2015 ). Those strategies may not 
have specifi  cally targeted people most likely to benefi t, 
or  they  failed  to  adapt  interventions  for  the  needs  of  
frail  people.    
 Social Aspects of Frailty 
 A key consideration when addressing frailty is how 
do  intrinsic  factors,  such  as  medical  and  functional  
problems, genetics, and frailty itself, occur in the con-
text  of  extrinsic  factors  such  as  social  and  physical  
environments?  In  addition  to  socioeconomic  gradient  
(Marmot  &  Shipley,    1996  ),  other  social  factors  are  
linked to health status in older adults. These include 
social support (emotional or hands-on [Berkman,  2000 ; 
Holt-Lunstad, Smith, & Layton,  2010 ]), living situation, 
social engagement (Bennett,  2005 ; Krueger et al.,  2009 ), 
mastery (Marmot,  2004 ), social capital, and social cohe-
sion (Putnam,    2000  ;  Subramanian,  Kim,  &  Kiwachi,  
  2002  ).  Since  older  people’s  social  circumstances  are  
complex, we require a holistic understanding of the 
complexity of social factors and social vulnerability. 
For example, two older women with equivalent frailty 
who  both  live  alone  may  have  very  different  levels  
of  social  vulnerability.  One  may  be  well  integrated  
within networks of family and friends, engage regu-
larly in community activities, and feel a high sense 
of  mastery  and  control  over  her  life  circumstances.  
The other may be isolated, lonely, and have limited 
social and fi nancial resources. In the same way that 
the  FI  measures  accumulated  health  defi cits, social 
factors can be usefully combined by counting accumu-
lated social problems or “defi cits”, helping to paint an 
overall picture of social vulnerability or robustness for 
dealing  with  health  and  social  problems  (Andrew  &  
Keefe,   2014 ). 
  In  Canadian  studies,  lower  social  position  (educa-
tion and income) was strongly associated with frailty 
(St. John, Montgomery, & Tyas,  2013 ), and social vul-
nerability  correlated  moderately  with  frailty,  with  
both  contributing  independently  to  risk  of  death  
(Andrew, Mitnitski, & Rockwood,  2008 ). Other factors 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 288      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
determining frailty include low socioeconomic status, 
having  few  relatives  and  neighbours  or  little  contact  
with  them,  low  participation  in  community  or  reli-
gious activities, and low social support (Lurie, Myers, 
Goldbourt,  &  Gerber,    2014  ;  Peek,  Howrey,  Ternent,  
Ray,  &  Ottenbacher,    2012  ;  Salem  et  al.,    2013  ;  Woo,  
Goggins,  Sham,  &  Ho,    2005  ).  From  a  societal  view,  
levels of frailty across Europe correlate with national 
economic indicators such as gross domestic product 
(Theou et al.,  2013 ). 
 An understanding of social circumstances is necessary 
to reduce social risk factors for poor health outcomes 
from frailty. This is particularly the case with multiple 
social problems, as overall social vulnerability is linked 
to  cognitive  decline  and  mortality  even  among  the  
fi  ttest  older  people  (Andrew  et  al.,    2008  ;  Andrew,  
Mitnitski,  Kirkland,  &  Rockwood,    2012  ;  Andrew  &  
Rockwood,  2010 ). Health care providers need a com-
prehensive,  organized  understanding  of  social  cir-
cumstances,  available  resources,  and  supports.  These  
are key to planning care for people identifi  ed as frail, 
particularly in care transitions such as hospital dis-
charge and in making decisions about care needs and 
residence.   
 Ethical and Legal Implications of Screening 
for Frailty 
 Ethical analysis in health care decision-making exam-
ines relevant core values and norms, including consid-
ering the welfare of persons and the balancing of harms 
and benefi ts. It considers the value placed on personal 
autonomy,  fairness,  and  equity.  It  is  accompanied  by  
legal obligations that provide the structures for applying 
these fundamental principles. 
 If frailty goes unrecognized, the current approach to 
clinical decision-making and health service delivery 
may  be  inadequate.  People  may  be  harmed  if  they  
are denied care or, more typically, are given care with-
out their  underlying  frailty  being  considered  suffi -
ciently.  Frailty  must  be  understood  and  taken  into  
account because its presence or absence is critical to 
understanding  how  care  may  offer  benefi  t  or  harm  
(Mallery & Moorhouse,  2011 ). Screening for frailty is 
meant to reduce clinical uncertainty and refi ne clin-
ical decision-making. 
 When frailty is not understood in context, standards 
of  practice  are  followed  whether  or  not  they  refl ect 
the best interests of frail people. Aggressive and life-
sustaining treatments for older adults are increasingly 
accepted  as  the  norm.  They  are  sometimes  applied  
without careful thought about their inability to reverse 
declines in function or whether they fi t the goals of 
patients or their families (Ferrucci et al.,  2004 ). When the 
risk from frailty is not suffi ciently considered, the result 
may be harm to those treated. Coronary artery bypass 
surgery  is  a  striking  example,  whereby  most  frail  
people will either die (15%) or be catastrophically dis-
abled (50%) following surgery (Afi lalo et al.,  2012 ; Lee, 
Buth, Martin, Yip, & Hirsch,  2010 ). 
 Respect for autonomy occurs via care providers’ ethical 
and legal obligations to help people make informed 
health  care  decisions  (Entwistle,  Carter,  Cribb,  &  
McCaffery,  2010 ). Frail people often face obstacles in 
health  care  that  hinder  truly  valid  and  meaningful  
choice. For example, choice may be undermined by 
standards of practice that are not appropriate for frail 
people; hopes may be raised and risks of conditions 
and procedures not fully considered (Shim, Russ, & 
Kaufman,  2006 ). The void in medical evidence for frail 
people creates diffi culty for health care providers who 
are ethically and legally obligated to facilitate informed 
decision-making. 
 Identifying frailty in older adults can have implica-
tions for their informed decision-making. They may 
be vulnerable to paternalistic health care arising from 
assumptions about diminished ability to understand 
and make decisions, particularly in the face of complex 
information regarding diffi cult options. As a conse-
quence, they may not be given all the information or 
adequate  assistance  to  understand  the  information  
they need to fully assess their clinical options. This 
risk is even greater if the diagnostic criteria for iden-
tifying frailty emphasize diminished cognitive func-
tion or physical dependency (McNally & Lahey,  2014 ). 
 Older adults, especially those who lack capacity, are 
systematically  excluded  from  research  trials  even  
though they experience the greatest collective health 
burdens (Herrara et al.,  2010 ). Chronic disease inter-
ventions  in  older  adults  are  likely  to  have  different  
outcomes  for  those  who  are  frail  versus  those  who  
are not (Bergman et al.,  2007 ). Designing a research 
agenda  appropriate  for  frail  older  adults  remains  a  
further  challenge.  Even  so,  trials  and  health  effec-
tiveness research that meaningfully address the needs 
of this population remains an urgent need. Evidence 
from research that does not include frail older adults 
or even adults with multiple simultaneous diseases 
should be extended only carefully, if at all, to those 
who  are  frail  (Ferrucci  et  al.,    2004  ).  Such  evidence  
may not suffi ciently refl ect outcomes or risks. 
  By  characterizing  frailty  as  a  biophysical  state,  health  
care  providers  using  frailty  as  the  basis  for  clinical  
decision-making could thereby validate and offer objec-
tivity to ageism (Special Senate Committee on Aging, 
 2009 ). The risk is that a diagnosis of frailty may be used 
to justify limiting, withholding, or denying types of 
care to frail people, increasing their loss of indepen-
dence in decision-making (McNally & Lahey,  2014 ). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      289 
More broadly, a diagnosis of “being frail” could lead to 
broader  and  perhaps  more  intractable  discrimination  
at home or in social networks and communities. 
 Conversely, clarifying a person’s position on a spectrum 
of  frailty  could  ensure  that  older  adults  are  informed,  
diagnosed,  and  treated  appropriately  for  their  actual  
“needs,  circumstances  and  capacities.”  This  is  the  con-
cept used in Canadian law to distinguish between valid 
differentiations  based  on  age  (or  other  grounds  of  dis-
crimination)  and  differentiations  based  on  stereotype  
(Minister  of  Employment  and  Immigration,    1999  ).  Dif-
ferentiating based on relative frailty may indeed avoid 
differentiating based on age and reduce age-based dis-
crimination (McNally & Lahey,  2014 ). 
 Older adults deserve responsive attention in propor-
tion  to  their  health  care  needs  (Giordano,    2005  ).  In  
Canadian law, equality of older persons requires that 
their  needs  be  given  “equal  concern  and  respect”  in  
health  care  as  elsewhere  (Alon-Shenker,    2012  ).  This  
means  that  stereotyping  based  on  frailty  must  be  
avoided, but it also requires informed evidence-based 
attention to frailty. Any changes pursued in screening 
for frailty must consider how we can make fair health 
care decisions with fi nite resources. This is especially 
pertinent  for  frail  older  adults  who  may  be  particu-
larly  vulnerable  to  ageism  and  age-based  discrimi-
nation.  Without  clarity  on  the  needs,  circumstances,  
and capacity  of  frail  older  adults,  decisions  may  be  
made through legal channels that push towards simple 
yes/no choices rather than towards refl ective delibera-
tion by a broad spectrum of stakeholders (McNally & 
Lahey,  2014 ). 
  Assuring  that  the  voices  of  the  individual  and  the  
family are considered in all decision-making reduces 
concerns about discrimination based on age or frailty. 
As  an  example,  the  Palliative  and  Therapeutic  Har-
monization (PATH) program in Nova Scotia provides 
individuals  and  their  families  with  comprehensive  
information and a greater understanding of the impli-
cations of treatment decisions and frailty. Individuals 
and  families  often  opt  for  fewer  interventions  and  
pursue  less  aggressive  alternatives  (Capital  Health,  
  2015  ;  Moorhouse  &  Mallery,    2012  ).  Overall,  aware-
ness of frailty may change the benefi ts and risks seen 
in  any  treatment  decision,  and  empower  informed  
decision-making.   
 Policy Implications of Adopting Frailty 
Screening 
 Many political and economic forces require that we fo-
cus on frail older adults. The baby boomers, the largest 
group  in  our  population,  are  entering  age  brackets  
where frailty is increasingly prevalent. They may also 
be caring for their frail parents and politically will 
advocate for changes in how health care manages our 
aging population (Conference Board of Canada,  2013 ). 
  From  an  economic  perspective,  the  policy  discussion  
around aging is shaped by the recognition that a large 
and growing proportion of health care spending is on 
seniors, particularly on those nearing the end of life. 
In this context, health care systems may provide older 
adults  with  both  too  much  care  and  too  little  care  
(Rockwood,  2005a ). Our current health care structure 
excels  at  illness-specifi  c  interventions  but  does  not  
suffi  ciently  consider  higher  risk  and  lower  potential  
benefi ts in older persons. Providing illness-specifi c care 
may  come  at  the  expense  of  responsive,  integrated,  
and continuous programs of care and chronic disease 
management (McNally & Lahey,  2014 ). 
  By  systematically  and  comprehensively  identifying  
frailty and its signifi cance to patients, health care pro-
viders can guide evidence-based approaches to clinical 
care  that  have  the  necessary  rehabilitative  and  social  
supports. A change in health care practice can under-
pin broader system changes (McNally & Lahey,  2014 ). 
 To systematically implement frailty screening, a number 
of policy changes are required. A common language 
needs  be  used  among  researchers,  health  care  pro-
viders, administrators, policy makers, and the public, 
particularly  in  defi  ning  frailty.  Researchers  and  clini-
cians need to identify and agree on which validated 
frailty  tools  to  use  in  which  setting.  Consensus  is  
needed  on  whom  to  screen.  Possible  approaches  
include  screening  all  individuals  over  a  certain  age  
who come into contact with the health care system, 
or screening on the basis of selected criteria such as 
age, selected medical conditions, psychosocial disor-
ders,  falls  or  functional  disability,  high  use  of  the  
health  care  system,  and  change  in  living  situation  
such as moving from independent to assisted living. 
In  particular,  age  as  a  criterion  for  screening  is  the  
simplest  but  may  vary  depending  on  the  setting.  For  
example,  age  older  than  65  years  may  be  an  appro-
priate criterion for older adults presenting to the emer-
gency department or intensive care unit, but age older 
than 75 may be more appropriate in primary care set-
tings  (Bagshaw  et  al.,    2014  ;  McCusker  et  al.,    1999  ;  
Romero-Ortuno  &  Soraghan,    2014  ;  Winograd  et  al.,  
 1991 ). 
  We  will  need  further  agreement  on  individuals  who  
conduct frailty screening and their qualifi cations. Family 
members and a variety of health care providers can be 
trained in simple assessments and screening. However, 
we  do  not  yet  know  whether  a  health  care  provider  
trained across multiple disciplines can provide a detailed 
assessment across a number of domains. Multidimen-
sional assessment may need to be conducted by teams 
of  health  care  providers  with  appropriate  training.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 290      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
If we are to meet demand, we must evolve innovative 
models  of  care  that  are  tested  for  their  outcomes  and  
effectiveness. Depending on who are the providers that 
conduct  screening,  changes  may  be  required  to  pro-
vincial  regulation  of  selected  health  disciplines  to  
clarify scope of practice and legal liability in order to 
allow them to act based on the results of the screening 
conducted. 
 Finally, the economics of reimbursement for screening 
require attention. In particular, what funding model 
should  be  used  to  ensure  that  frailty  screening  is  
part  of  core  insured  services?  Should  the  model  be  
based  on  the  prevalence  of  frailty?  Who  will  eval-
uate  whether  screening  is  working  or  how  it  could  
work better? How do we demonstrate the benefi ts of 
screening? How do we fully include frail older adults 
and  their  families  or  caregivers  in  decision-making  
on these matters (Dickson, Lindstrom, Black, & Van der 
Gucht,   2012 )?   
 Implementing Frailty Screening through 
Knowledge Translation 
 Implementing frailty screening requires broad dissem-
ination  of  the  extensive  body  of  evidence  on  frailty  
through  knowledge  translation  efforts.  Typically,  this  
knowledge is held mainly by experts in aging. Dissem-
ination  requires  distributing  and  sharing  evidence  by  
identifying appropriate target audiences and tailoring 
messages to those audiences. 
  Some  evidence  and  ideas  diffuse  passively  without  
additional support (Lomas,  1993 ), but most evidence 
requires  active  knowledge  translation  strategies  and  
requires building collaborations with researchers and 
a spectrum of knowledge users including health care 
providers,  administrators,  policy  makers,  decision  
makers, service organizations, and older adults and 
their families (Harris et al.,  2012 ). 
  Strategies  for  knowledge  translation  and  dissemina-
tion  will  need  to  reach  beyond  health  care  providers,  
because targeting the health care system, older adults, 
and their families may be more effective (Tricco et al., 
 2014 ). Strategies should be embedded within the health 
care system and across its various settings to identify 
frail older adults and target appropriate care to them. 
With older adults’ frailty risk recognized, we can give 
them  evidence-informed  self-management  strategies  
to promote successful aging and to help them main-
tain independent functioning as long as possible. Self-
management can include physical activity, healthy diet, 
smoking  cessation,  vaccination,  and  moderation  of  
alcohol  consumption  (Sabia  et  al.,    2012  ).  Addition-
ally, engaging frail older adults in care planning will 
ensure that their goals and values are respected (You, 
Fowler, & Heyland,  2014 ). 
  In  disseminating  knowledge  on  frailty  and  the  need  
for screening, we will need a systematic approach to 
bridge the evidence-to-action gap and consider bar-
riers and enablers. Potential barriers include lack of 
knowledge on frailty and its impact, lack of caregiver 
skills, ingrained social or professional roles and iden-
tities, existing  beliefs  about  capabilities  and  conse-
quences in frail people, existing intentions or goals, 
environmental  context  and  resources,  social  infl u-
ences, and behavioural regulation (Cane, O’Conner, & 
Michie,    2012  ).  Potential  enablers  include  the  strong  
desire to change the status quo and the work that has 
been done up to the present in Canada, including the 
widespread adoption and implementation of interRAI 
assessments  in  many  provinces  and  health  care  set-
tings. All of these will need to be considered as we 
mobilize  the  evidence  base  on  frailty  screening  into  
and across the health care system.   
 Conclusion 
  With  the  progressive  aging  of  the  Canadian  popula-
tion, the prevalence of frailty will continue to rise and 
will  require  us  to  alter  the  single-system  illness  focus  
of our health care system. Frail older adults with mul-
tisystem disease require holistic models of care to opti-
mize patient-centred outcomes and improve quality of 
life. Central to this model is the identifi  cation and mea-
surement  of  frailty,  both  of  which  will  allow  health  
care to be tailored to this growing, vulnerable segment 
of our society, since some interventions may only ben-
efi t those who are frail and some aggressive interven-
tions may harm frail people. As we better understand 
the biological basis of frailty, its treatments, and ways to 
slow or reverse it, identifying frailty will become even 
more vital. For frail people whose decline in health 
status  cannot  be  treated  effectively,  we  can  prevent  
unnecessary  and  unwanted  interventions  by  improving  
care  at  end  of  life.  By  better  understanding,  recog-
nizing, and managing frailty, we will improve the sus-
tainability of our publicly funded health care system.    
  References 
    Abellan   van   Kan  ,     G.  ,     Rolland  ,     Y.  ,     Andrieu  ,     S.  ,     Bauer  ,     J.  , 
  Beauchet  ,     O.  ,     Bonnefoy  ,     M.  ,   ...   &     Vellas  ,     B  .   ( 2009 ). 
  Gait  speed  at  usual  pace  as  a  predictor  of  adverse  
outcomes  in  community-dwelling  older  people  an  
International Academy on Nutrition and Aging (IANA) 
Task  Force  .    The  Journal  of  Nutrition  Health  and  Aging , 
 13 ( 10 ),   881 – 889 .  
    A fi  lalo  ,    J.  ,    Mottillo  ,    S.  ,    Eisenberg  ,    M.  J.  ,    Alexander  ,    K.  P.  , 
  Noiseux  ,     N.  ,     Perrault  ,     L.   P.  ,   ...     Bergman  ,     H  .   ( 2012 ). 
 Addition of frailty and disability to cardiac surgery risk 
scores  identifi  es  elderly  patients  at  high  risk  of  mor-
tality  or  major  morbidity  .    Circulation:  Cardiovascular  
Quality Outcomes ,   5 ( 2 ),   222 – 228 .  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      291 
    Akki  ,     A.  ,     Yang  ,     H.  ,     Gupta  ,     A.  ,     Chacko  ,     V.   P.  ,     Yano  ,     T.  , 
  Leppo  ,    M.  K.  ,  ...  &    Weiss  ,    R.  G  .  ( 2014 ).   Skeletal  muscle 
ATP  kinetics  are  impaired  in  frail  mice  .    Age ,    36 ( 1 ), 
 21 – 30 .  
    Alon-Shenker  ,     P  .   ( 2012 ).    The   unequal   right   to   equality: 
Towards a dignifi ed lives approach to age discrimina-
tion .   The Canadian Journal of Law & Jurisprudence ,   25 ( 2 ), 
 243 – 282 .  
    Andrew  ,    M.  ,  &    Keefe  ,    J  .  ( 2014 ).   Social  vulnerability  among 
older  adults:  A  social  ecology  perspective  from  the  
National  Population  Health  Survey  of  Canada  .    BMC 
Geriatrics ,   14 ( 90 ),   1 – 14 .  
    Andrew  ,    M.  ,    Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,    Kirkland  ,    S.  A.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  . 
( 2012 ).  The impact of social vulnerability on the survival 
of the fi ttest older adults .  Age and Ageing ,   41 ( 2 ),   161 – 165 .  
    Andrew  ,    M.  K.  ,    Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  .  ( 2008 ).   Social 
vulnerability,  frailty,  and  mortality  in  elderly  people  .  
 PLoS One ,   3 ( 5 ),   e2232 .  
    Andrew  ,     M.   K.  ,   &     Rockwood  ,     K  .   ( 2010 ).    Social   vulnerabil-
ity predicts cognitive decline in a prospective cohort of 
older Canadians .  Alzheimers & Dementia ,   6 ( 4 ),   319 – 325 .  
    Armstrong  ,    J.  J.  ,    Stolee  ,    P.  ,    Hirdes  ,    J.  P.  ,  &    Poss  ,    J.  W  .  ( 2010 ). 
  Examining  three  frailty  conceptualizations  in  their  ability  
to predict negative outcomes for home-care clients .  Age 
and Ageing ,   39 ( 6 ),   755 – 758 .  
    Bagshaw  ,    S.  M.  ,    Stelfox  ,    H.  T.  ,    Johnson  ,    J.  A.  ,    McDermid  ,    R.  C.  , 
  Rolfson  ,    D.  B.  ,    Tsuyuki  ,    R. T.  ,  ...    Majumbar  ,    S.  R  .  ( 2015 ). 
 Long-term association between frailty and health-related 
quality-of-life among survivors of critical illness: A pro-
spective multicenter cohort study .  Critical Care Medicine , 
 43 ( 5 ),   973 – 982 .  
    Bagshaw  ,    S.  M.  ,    Stelfox  ,    H.  T.  ,    McDermid  ,    R.  C.  ,    Rolfson  ,    D.  B.  , 
  Tsuyuki  ,     R.   T.  ,     Baig  ,     N.  ,   ...    et   al .   ( 2014 ).   Association 
between  frailty  and  short-  and  long-term  outcomes  
among  critically  ill  patients:  A  multicentre  prospec-
tive cohort study .  Canadian Medical Association Journal , 
 186 ( 2 ),   E95 – E102 .  
    Bennett  ,     K.   M  .   ( 2005 ).    Social   engagement   as   a   longitudinal 
predictor  of  objective  and  subjective  health  .    European 
Journal of Ageing ,   2 ( 1 ),   48 – 55 .  
    Bergman  ,     H.  ,     Ferrucci  ,     L.  ,     Guralnik  ,     J.  ,     Hogan  ,     D.   B.  , 
  Hummel  ,    S.  ,    Karunananthan  ,    S.  ,  &    Wolfson  ,    C  .  ( 2007 ). 
 Frailty: An emerging research and clinical paradigm–
Issues  and  controversies  .    Journal  of  Gerontology ,    62A ( 7 ),  
731 – 737 .  
    Berkman  ,     L.   F  .   ( 2000 ).    Social   support,   social   networks, 
social cohesion and health .  Social Work in Health Care , 
 31 ( 2 ),   3 – 14 .  
    Brault  ,     M.   E.  ,     Ohayon  ,     S.   M.  ,     Kwan  ,     R.  ,     Bergman  ,     H.  , 
  Eisenberg  ,     M.   J.  ,     Boivin  ,     J.   F.  ,   ...   &     Afi  lalo  ,     J  .   ( 2014 ). 
 Telomere length and the clinical phenotype of frailty 
in older adults undergoing cardiac surgery .  Journal of 
the American Geriatrics Society ,   62 ( 11 ),   2205 – 2207 .  
    Brennan  ,    T.  A.  ,    Leape  ,    L.  L.  ,    Laird  ,    N.  M.  ,    Herbert  ,    L.  ,    Localio  , 
  A.  R.  ,    Lawthers  ,    A.  G.  ,  ...  &    Hiatt  ,    H.  H  .  ( 1991 ).   Incidence 
of   adverse   events   and   negligence   in   hospitalized   
patients–Results of the Harvard Medical Practice Study I . 
 New England Journal of Medicine ,   7 ( 324 ),   370 – 376 .  
    Brothers  ,    T.  D.  ,    Kirkland  ,    S.  ,    Guaraldi  ,    G.  ,    Falutz  ,    J.  ,    Theou  ,    O.  , 
  Johnston  ,    B.  L.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  .  ( 2014 ).   Frailty  in  people 
aging with human immunodefi ciency virus (HIV) infec-
tion .   Journal of Infectious Diseases ,   210 ( 8 ),   1170 – 1179 .  
    Brownie  ,     S.  ,   &     Nancarrow  ,     S  .   ( 2013 ).    Effects   of   person-
centered  care  on  residents  and  staff  in  aged-care  facil-
ities: A systematic review .  Clinical Interventions in Aging , 
 8 ,   1 – 10 .  
    Buckinx  ,      F.  ,      Rolland  ,      Y.  ,      Reginster  ,      J.    Y.  ,      Ricour  ,      C.  ,   
Petermans  ,    J.  ,  &    Bruyère  ,    O  .  ( 2015 ).   Burden  of  frailty 
in  the  elderly  population:  Perspectives  for  a  public  
health challenge .  Archives of Public Health ,   73 ( 1 ),   19 .  
    Buth  ,    K.  J.  ,    Gainer  ,    R.  A.  ,    Legare  ,    J.  F.  ,  &    Hirsch  ,    G.  M  .  ( 2014 ). 
  The  changing  face  of  cardiac  surgery:  Practice  patterns  
and outcomes 2001–2010 .  Canadian Journal of Cardiology , 
 30 ( 2 ),   224 – 230 .  
   Canadian  Institute  for  Health  Information .  ( 2011 ).   A focus on 
seniors and aging .  Ottawa, ON :  Health Care in Canada .  
   Canadian Study of Health and Aging Working Group . ( 1994 ). 
 Canadian study of health and aging: Study methods and 
prevalence  of  dementia  .    Canadian  Medical  Association  
Journal ,   150 ( 6 ),   899 – 913 .  
    Cane  ,    J.  ,    O’Connor  ,    D.  ,  &    Michie  ,    S  .  ( 2012 ).   Validation  of  the 
theoretical  domains  framework  for  use  in  behaviour  
change  and  implementation  research  .    Implementation 
Science ,   7 ,   37 .  
   Capital   Health .   ( 2015 ).    Palliative  &  therapeutic  harmonization  
clinic  .  Retrieved  from    http://www.cdha.nshealth.ca/
geriatric-medicine/palliative-therapeutic-harmonization-
clinic   
    Carlson  ,     C.  ,     Merel  ,     S.   E.  ,   &     Yukawa  ,     M  .   ( 2015 ).    Geriatric 
syndromes  and  geriatric  assessment  for  the  generalist  .  
 Medical Clinics of North America ,   99 ( 2 ),   263 – 279 .  
    Carpenter  ,    C.  R.  ,    Shelton  ,    E.  ,    Fowler  ,    S.  ,    Suffoletto  ,    B.  ,    Platts-
Mills  ,    T.  F.  ,    Rothman  ,    R.  E.  ,  &    Hogan  ,    T.  M  .  ( 2015 ).   Risk 
factors  and  screening  instruments  to  predict  adverse  
outcomes for undifferentiated older emergency depart-
ment  patients:  A  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  .  
 Academic Emergency Medicine ,   22 ( 1 ),   1 – 21 .  
    Chow  ,     W.   B.  ,     Rosenthal  ,     R.   A.  ,     Merkow  ,     R.   P.  ,     Ko  ,     C.  ,   & 
  Esnaola  ,    N.  F  .  ( 2012 ).   Optimal  preoperative  assessment 
of  the  geriatric  surgical  patient:  A  best  practices  guide-
line  from  the  American  College  of  Surgeons  National  
Surgical Quality Improvement Program and the American 
Geriatrics  Society  .    Journal  of  the  American  College  of  Sur-
geons ,   215 ( 4 ),   453 – 466 .  
    Clegg  ,    A.  ,     Rogers  ,     L.  ,   &    Young  ,     J  .   ( 2015 ).    Diagnostic   test 
accuracy of simple instruments for identifying frailty in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 292      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
community-dwelling older people: A systematic review . 
 Age and Ageing ,   44 ( 1 ),   148 – 152 .  
    Clegg  ,    A.  ,    Young  ,    J.  ,    Iliffe  ,    S.  ,    Rikkert  ,    M.  O.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  . 
(  2013  ).    Frailty  in  elderly  people  .    Lancet ,    381 ( 9868 ), 
 752 – 762 .  
    Collerton  ,    J.  ,    Martin-Ruiz  ,    C.  ,    Davies  ,    K.  ,    Hilkens  ,    C.  M.  , 
  Isaacs  ,     J.  ,     Kolenda  ,     C.  ,   ...   &     Kirkwood  ,     T.   B  .   ( 2012 ). 
 Frailty and the role of infl ammation, immunosenescence 
and  cellular  ageing  in  the  very  old:  Cross-sectional  
fi ndings from the Newcastle 85+ study .  Mechanisms of 
Ageing and Development ,   133 ( 6 ),   456 – 466 .  
   Conference  Board  of  Canada   ( 2013 ).   Future care for Canadian 
seniors—Why it matters .   Ottawa,  ON :   Author .  
    Costa  ,    A.  P.  ,  &    Hirdes  ,    J.  P  .  ( 2010 ).   Clinical  characteristics  and 
service needs of alternate-level-of-care patients waiting 
for long-term care in Ontario hospitals .  Healthcare Policy , 
 6 ( 1 ),   32 .  
    Costa  ,     A.   P.  ,     Hirdes  ,     J.   P.  ,     Heckman  ,     G.   A.  ,     Dey  ,     A.   B.      
Jonsson  ,    P.  V.  ,    Lakhan  ,    P.  ,  ...    Gray  ,    L.  C  .  ( 2014 ).   Geriat-
ric syndromes predict postdischarge outcomes among 
older emergency department patients: Findings from 
the  interRAI  Multinational  Emergency  Department  
Study .   Academic Emergency Medicine ,   21 ( 4 ),   422 – 433 .  
    Covinsky  ,     K.   E.  ,     Pierluissi  ,     E.  ,   &     Johnston  ,     C.   B  .   ( 2011 ). 
 Hospitalization-associated disability: “She was prob-
ably able to ambulate, but I’m not sure” .  Journal of the 
American Medical Association ,   306 ( 16 ),   1782 – 1793 .  
    Debettignies  ,      B.  ,      Mahurin  ,      R.  ,    &      Pirozzolo  ,      F  .    ( 1990 ).  
Insight for impairment in independent living skills in 
Alzheimer’s disease and multi-infarct dementia .  Jour-
nal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology ,   12 ( 2 ), 
 355 – 363 .  
    de    Vries  ,      N.    M.  ,      Staal  ,      J.    B.  ,      van    Ravensberg  ,      C.    D.  ,   
Hobbelen  ,    J.  S.  ,    Olde  Rikkert  ,    M.  G.  ,  &    Nijhuis-van  der 
Sanden  ,    M.  W  .  ( 2011 ).   Outcome  instruments  to  measure 
frailty:  A  systematic  review  .    Ageing  Research  Reviews , 
 10 ( 1 ),   104 – 114 .  
    Dickson  ,    G.  ,    Lindstrom  ,    R.  ,    Black  ,    C.  ,  &    Van  der  Gucht  ,    D  . 
( 2012 ).   Evidence-informed change management in Canadian 
healthcare  organizations .    Ottawa,   ON :    Canadian   Health 
Services Research Foundation .  
    Doupe  ,    M.  ,    Brownell  ,    M.  ,    Kozyrskyj  ,    A.  ,    Dik  ,    N.  ,    Burchill  ,    C.  , 
  Dahl  ,    M.  ,  ...    Bodnarchuk  ,    J  .  ( 2006 ).   Using administrative 
data  to  develop  indicators  of  quality  care  in  personal  care  
homes  .    Winnipeg,  MB  :    Manitoba  Centre  for  Health  Pol-
icy, Department of Community Health Sciences .  
    Doupe  ,     M.  ,     Brownell  ,     M.  ,     St.   John  ,     P.  ,     Strang  ,     D.   G.  , 
  Chateau  ,     D.  ,   &     Dik  ,     N  .   ( 2011 ).    Nursing   home   adverse 
events: Further insight into highest risk periods .  Journal of 
the American Medical Directors Association ,   12 ( 6 ),   467 – 474 .  
    Doupe  ,    M.  B.  ,    St.  John  ,    P.  ,    Chateau  ,    D.  ,    Strang  ,    D.  ,    Smele  ,    S.  , 
  Bozat-Emre  ,    S.  ,  ...  &    Dik  ,    N  .  ( 2012 ).   Profi  ling  the  mul-
tidimensional  needs  of  new  nursing  home  residents:  
Evidence  to  support  planning  .    Journal  of  the  American  
Medical Directors Association ,   13 ( 5 ),   e9 – e17 .  
    Drubbel  ,    I.  ,    Numans  ,    M.  E.  ,    Kranenburg  ,    G.  ,    Bleijenberg  ,    N.  , 
  de   Wit  ,     N.   J.  ,   &     Schuurmans  ,     M.   J  .   ( 2014 ).    Screening 
for frailty in primary care: A systematic review of the 
psychometric  properties  of  the  frailty  index  in  com-
munity-dwelling older people .  BMC Geriatrics ,   14 ( 27 ), 
 1 – 13 .  
    Entwistle  ,     V.   A.  ,     Carter  ,     S.   M.  ,     Cribb  ,     A.  ,   &     McCaffery  ,     K  . 
( 2010 ).  Supporting patient autonomy: The importance of 
clinician-patient relationships .  Journal of General Internal 
Medicine ,   25 ( 7 ),   741 – 745 .  
    Feridooni  ,    H.  A.  ,    Sun  ,    M.  H.  ,    Rockwood  ,    K.  ,  &    Howlett  ,    S.  E  . 
( 2014 ).  Reliability of a frailty index based on the clinical 
assessment of health defi  cits in male C57BL/6J mice .  The 
Journal of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Med-
ical Sciences ,   70 ( 6 ),   686 – 693 .  
    Ferrucci  ,     L.  ,     Guralnik  ,     J.   M.  ,     Studenski  ,     S.  ,     Fried  ,     L.   P.  , 
  Cutler  ,    G.  B.  ,  &    Walston  ,    J.  D  .  ( 2004 ).   Designing  random-
ized,  controlled  trials  aimed  at  preventing  or  delaying  
functional decline and disability in frail, older persons: 
A  consensus  report  .    Journal  of  the  American  Geriatrics  
Society ,   52 ( 4 ),   625 – 634 .  
    Freiheit  ,    E.  A.  ,    Hogan  ,    D.  B.  ,    Strain  ,    L.  A.  ,    Schmaltz  ,    H.  N.  , 
  Patten  ,     S.   B.  ,     Eliasziw  ,     M.  ,   &     Maxwell  ,     C.   J  .   ( 2011 ).  
Operationalizing frailty among older residents of assisted 
living facilities .  BMC Geriatrics ,   11 ( 23 ),   1 – 11 .  
    Fried  ,     L.   P.  ,     Tangen  ,     C.   M.  ,     Walston  ,     J.  ,     Newman  ,     A.   B.  , 
  Hirsh  ,     C.  ,     Gottdiener  ,     J.  ,   ...   &     McBurnie  ,     M.  A  .   ( 2001 ). 
  Frailty  in  older  adults:  Evidence  for  a  phenotype  .    Jour-
nals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical 
Sciences ,   56 ( 3 ),   M146 – M157 .  
    Garrouste-Orgeas  ,    M.  ,    Boumendil  ,    A.  ,    Pateron  ,    D.  ,    Aergerter  ,    P.  , 
  Somme  ,    D.  ,    Simon  ,    T.  ,  &    Goudet  ,    B  .  ( 2009 ).   Selection  of 
intensive  care  unit  admission  criteria  for  patients  aged  
80  years  and  over  and  compliance  of  emergency  and  
intensive care unit physicians with the selected criteria: 
An  observational,  multicenter,  prospective  study  .    Criti-
cal Care Medicine ,   37 ( 11 ),   2919 – 2928 .  
    Giordano  ,    S  .  ( 2005 ).   Respect  for  equality  and  the  treatment  of 
the elderly: Declarations of human rights and age-based 
rationing .   Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics ,   14 ( 1 ), 
 83 – 92 .  
    Gobbens  ,     R.   J.   J.  ,     van   Assen  ,     M.   A.   L.   M.  ,     Luijkx  ,     K.   G.  , 
  Wijnen-Sponselee  ,     M.   T.  ,   &     Schols  ,     J.   M  .   ( 2010 ).    The 
Tilburg  Frailty  Indicator:  Psychometric  properties  .  
 Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Directors  Association , 
 11 ( 5 ),   344 – 355 .  
    Goldstein  ,    J.  ,    Hubbard  ,    R.  E.  ,    Moorhouse  ,    P.  ,    Andrew  ,    M.  K.  , 
  Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  .  ( 2015 ).   The  validation  of 
a  care  partner-derived  frailty  index  based  upon  com-
prehensive geriatric assessment (CP-FI-CGA) in emer-
gency  medical  services  and  geriatric  ambulatory  care  .  
 Age and Ageing ,   44 ( 2 ),   327 – 330 .  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      293 
    Gonzalez-Vaca  ,     J.  ,     de   la   Rica-Escuin  ,     M.  ,     Silva-Iglesias  ,     M.  , 
  Arjonilla-García  ,    M.  D.  ,    Varela-Pérez  ,    R.  ,    Oliver-Carbonell  , 
  J.  L.  ,  &    Abizanda  ,    P  .  ( 2014 ).   Frailty  in  institutionalized 
older adults from Albacete. The FINAL study: Rationale, 
design, methodology, prevalence and attributes .  Maturi-
tas ,   77 ( 1 ),   78 – 84 .  
    Gordon  ,    A.  ,  &    Oliver  ,    D  .  ( 2015 ).   Commentary:  Frameworks 
for long term conditions must take account of needs of 
frail older people .  British Medical Journal ,   10 ,   350 – 370 .  
    Gray  ,    L.  C.  ,    Peel  ,    N.  M.  ,    Costa  ,    A.  P.  ,    Burkett  ,    E.  ,    Dey  ,    A.  B.  , 
  Jonsson  ,     P.   V.  ,   ...     Hirdes  ,     J  .   ( 2013 ).    Profi  les  of  older  
patients in the emergency department: Findings from the 
interRAI  Multinational  Emergency  Department  Study  .  
 Annals of emergency medicine ,   62 ( 5 ),   467 – 474 .  
    Gruber-Baldini  ,    A.  ,     Stuart  ,     B.  ,     Zuckerman  ,     I.  ,     Van   Doren  ,     H.  , 
  Boockvar  ,     K.  ,     Zimmerman  ,     S.  ,   &     Magaziner  ,     J  .   ( 2009 ). 
  Sensitivity  of  nursing  home  cost  comparisons  to  method  
of dementia diagnosis ascertainment .  International Jour-
nal of Alzheimer’s Disease ,   2009 ,   1 – 10 .  doi: 10.4061/2009/
780720   
    Handforth  ,    C.  ,    Clegg  ,    A.  ,    Young  ,    C.  ,    Simpkins  ,    S.  ,    Seymour  , 
  M.  T.  ,    Selby  ,    P.  J.  ,  &    Young  ,    J  .  ( 2014 ).   The  prevalence 
and outcomes of frailty in older cancer patients: A sys-
tematic review .  Annals of Oncology ,   26 ( 6 ),   1091 – 1101 .  
    Harris  ,     J.   R.  ,     Cheadle  ,     A.  ,     Hannon  ,     P.   A.  ,     Forehand  ,     M.  , 
  Lichiello  ,    P.  ,    Mahoney  ,    E.  ,  ...    Yarrow  ,    J  .  ( 2012 ).  A  frame-
work  for  disseminating  evidence-based  health  pro-
motion practices.  CDC—Preventing Chronic Disease, 9.  
 http://dx.doi.org/10.5888/pcd9.110081   
    Herrara  ,     A.   P.  ,     Snipes  ,     S.   A.  ,     King  ,     D.   W.  ,     Torres-Vigil  ,     I.  , 
  Goldberg  ,     D.   S.  ,   &     Weinberg  ,    A.   D  .   ( 2010 ).    Disparate 
inclusion of older adults in clinical trials: Priorities and 
opportunities for policy and practice change .  American 
Journal of Public Health ,   100 ( S1 ),   S105 – S112 .  
    Heyland  ,    D.  ,    Cook  ,    D.  ,    Bagshaw  ,    S.  ,    Garland  ,    A.  ,    Stelfox  ,    T.  , 
  Mehta  ,    S.  ,  ...   Canadian  Critical  Care  Trials  Group  and 
Canadian Researchers at the End of Life Network . ( 2015 ). 
The very elderly admitted to ICU: A quality fi nish?  Crit-
ical Care Medicine ,   41 ( 11 ),   1911 – 1920 .  
    Hirdes  ,     J.   P.  ,     Curtin-Telegdi  ,     N.  ,     Poss  ,     J.   W.  ,     Gray  ,     L.  ,     Berg  , 
  K.   O.  ,     Stolee  ,     P.  ,   ...   &     Szczerbinska  ,     K  .   ( 2010 ).    interRAI 
contact assessment (CA) form and user’s manual: A screening 
level  assessment  for  emergency  department  and  intake  from  
community/hospital .  Version  9.2.   Washington,  DC :   interRAI .  
    Hirdes  ,    J.  P.  ,    Frijters  ,    D.  H.  ,  &    Teare  ,    G.  F  .  ( 2003 ).   The  MDS-
CHESS  Scale:  A  new  measure  to  predict  mortality  in  
institutionalized  older  people  .    Journal  of  the  American  
Geriatrics Society ,   51 ( 1 ),   96 – 100 .  
    Hirdes  ,    J.  P.  ,    Mitchell  ,    L.  ,    Maxwell  ,    C.  J.  ,  &    White  ,    N  .  ( 2011 ). 
  Beyond  the  ‘iron  lungs  of  gerontology’:  Using  evi-
dence to shape the future of nursing homes in Canada . 
 Canadian Journal on Aging ,   30 ( 3 ),   371 – 390 .  
    Hirdes  ,    J.  P.  ,    Poss  ,    J.  ,    Mitchell  ,    L.  ,    Korngut  ,    L.  ,  &    Heckman  ,    G  . 
(  2014  ).    Use  of  the  interRAI  CHESS  Scale  to  predict  
mortality  among  persons  with  neurological  conditions  
in three care settings .  PLoS ONE ,   9 ( 6 ),   e99066 .  
    Hogan  ,     D.   B.  ,     Freiheit  ,     E.   A.  ,     Strain  ,     L.   A.  ,     Patten  ,     S.   B.  , 
  Schmaltz  ,    H.  N.  ,    Rolfson  ,    D.  ,  &    Maxwell  ,    C.  J  .  ( 2012 ). 
 Comparing frailty measures in their ability to predict 
adverse outcome among older residents of assisted liv-
ing .   BMC Geriatrics ,   12 ( 56 ),   1 – 11 .  
    Holt-Lunstad  ,    J.  ,    Smith  ,    T.  B.  ,  &    Layton  ,    J.  B  .  ( 2010 ).   Social 
relationships and mortality risk: A meta-analytic review . 
 PLoS Medicine ,   7 ( 7 ),   e1000316 .  
    Hoogendijk  ,    E.  O.  ,    van  der  Horst  ,    H.  E.  ,    Deeg  ,    D.  J.  ,    Frijters  , 
  D.  H.  ,    Prins  ,    B.  A.  ,    Jansen  ,    A.  P.  ,  ...    van  Hout  ,    H.  P  .  ( 2013 ). 
 The  identifi  cation  of  frail  older  adults  in  primary  care:  
Comparing the accuracy of fi
 ve simple instruments .  Age 
and Ageing ,   42 ( 2 ),   262 – 265 .  
    Hoover  ,     M.  ,     Roterman  ,     M.  ,     Sanmartin  ,     C.  ,   &     Bernier  ,     J  . 
(  2013  ).    Validation  of  an  index  to  estimate  the  preva-
lence  of  frailty  among  community-dwelling  seniors  .  
 Health Reports ,   24 ( 9 ),   10 – 17 .  
    Howlett  ,    S.  E.  ,    Rockwood  ,    M.  R.  ,    Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  . 
( 2014 ).  Standard laboratory tests to identify older adults 
at increased risk of death .  BMC Medicine ,   12 ( 171 ),   1 – 8 .  
    Hubbard  ,    R.  E.  ,    Peel  ,    N.  M.  ,    Samanta  ,    M.  ,    Gray  ,    L.  C.  ,    Fries  , 
  B.  E.  ,    Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  .  ( 2015 ).   Derivation  of 
a frailty index from the interRAI acute care instrument . 
 BMC Geriatrics ,   15 ( 27 ),   1 – 8 .  
    Jones  ,     D.  ,     Song  ,     X.  ,     Mitnitski  ,     A.  ,   &     Rockwood  ,     K  .   ( 2005 ). 
  Evaluation  of  a  frailty  index  based  on  a  comprehen-
sive geriatric assessment in a population based study 
of  elderly  Canadians  .    Aging  Clinical  and  Experimental  
Research ,   17 ( 6 ),   465 – 471 .  
    Jones  ,    D.  M.  ,    Song  ,    X.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  .  ( 2004 ).   Operational-
izing a frailty index from a standardized comprehensive 
geriatric  assessment  .    Journal  of  the  American  Geriatrics  
Society ,   52 ( 11 ),   1929 – 1933 .  
    Joosten  ,     E.   L.  ,     Demuynck  ,     M.  ,     Detroyer  ,     E.  ,   &     Milisen  ,     K  . 
(  2014  ).    Prevalence  of  frailty  and  its  ability  to  predict  in  
hospital delirium, falls, and 6-month mortality in hospi-
talized older patients .  BMC Geriatrics ,   14 ( 1 ),   1 – 9 .  
    Joseph  ,    B.  ,    Pandit  ,    V.  ,    Zangbar  ,    B.  ,    Kulvatunyou  ,    N.  ,    Hashmi  , 
  A.  ,    Green  ,    D.  J.  ,    O’Keeffe  ,    T.  ,  ...  &    Rhee  ,    P  .  ( 2014 ).   Supe-
riority  of  frailty  over  age  in  predicting  outcomes  among  
geriatric  trauma  patients:  A  prospective  analysis  .    Journal 
of the American Medical Association Surgery ,   149 ( 8 ),   766 – 772 .  
    Jung  ,    H.  W.  ,    Kim  ,    S.  W.  ,    Ahn  ,    S.  ,    Lim  ,    J.  Y.  ,    Han  ,    J.  W.  ,    Kim  , 
  T.  H.  ,  ...  &    Kim  ,    C.  H  .  ( 2014 ).   Prevalence  and  outcomes 
of frailty in Korean elderly population: Comparisons 
of  a  multidimensional  frailty  index  with  two  pheno-
type models .  PLoS One ,   9 ( 2 ),   e87958 .  
    Kaehr  ,    E.  ,    Visvanathan  ,    R.  ,    Malmstrom  ,    T.  K.  ,  &    Morley  ,    J.  E  . 
(  2015  ).    Frailty  in  nursing  homes:  The  FRAIL-NH  scale  .  
 Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Directors  Association , 
 16 ( 2 ),   87 – 89 .  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 294      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
    Kane  ,    A.   E.  ,     Hilmer  ,     S.   N.  ,     Boyer  ,     D.  ,     Gavin  ,     K.  ,     Nines  ,     D.  , 
  Howlett  ,     S.   E.  ,   ...   &     Mitchell  ,     S.   J  .   ( 2015 ).    Impact   of 
longevity interventions on a validated mouse clinical 
frailty index .  The Journal of Gerontology Series A: Biolog-
ical Sciences and Medical Sciences .  doi: 10.1093/gerona/
glu315  (First published online: February 22, 2015).  
    Kanwar  ,    A.  ,    Singh  ,    M.  ,    Lennon  ,    R.  ,    Ghanta  ,    K.  ,    McNallan  , 
  S.  M.  ,  &    Roger  ,    V.  L  .  ( 2013 ).   Frailty  and  health-related 
quality of life among residents of long-term care facil-
ities .   Journal of Aging and Health ,   25 ( 5 ),   792 – 802 .  
    Kelaiditi  ,     E.  ,     Cesari  ,     M.  ,     Canevelli  ,     M.  ,     van   Kan  ,     G.   A.  , 
  Ousset  ,     P.   J.  ,     Gillette-Guyonnet  ,     S.  ,   ...   &     Vellas  ,     B  . 
(   2013   ).      Cognitive   frailty:   Rational   and   defi nition 
from  an  (I.A.N.A./I.A.G.G.)  international  consensus  
group .   The Journal of Nutrition Health and Aging ,   17 ( 9 ), 
 726 – 734 .  
    Kenig  ,    J.  ,    Zychiewicz  ,    B.  ,    Olszewska  ,    U.  ,  &    Richter  ,    P  .  ( 2015 ). 
  Screening  for  frailty  among  older  patients  with  cancer  
that  qualify  for  abdominal  surgery  .    Journal  of  Geriatric  
Oncology ,   6 ( 1 ),   52 – 59 .  
    Krueger  ,    K.  R.  ,    Wilson  ,    R.  S.  ,    Kamenetsky  ,    J.  M.  ,    Barnes  ,    L.  L.  , 
  Bienias  ,    J.  L.  ,  &    Bennett  ,    D.  A  .  ( 2009 ).   Social  engagement 
and  cognitive  function  in  old  age  .    Experimental  Aging  
Research ,   35 ( 1 ),   45 – 60 .  
    Lee  ,    D.  H.  ,    Buth  ,    K.  J.  ,    Martin  ,    B.  J.  ,    Yip  ,    A.  M.  ,  &    Hirsch  ,    G.  M  . 
( 2010 ).  Frail patients are at increased risk for mortality and 
prolonged  institutional  care  after  cardiac  surgery  .    Circula-
tion ,   121 ( 8 ),   973 – 978 .  
    Lee  ,    L.  ,    Heckman  ,    G.  ,  &    Molnar  ,    F  .  ( 2015 ).   Frailty:  Identifying 
elderly patients at high risk of poor outcomes .  Canadian 
Family Physician ,   61 ( 3 ),   227 – 231 .  
    Le   Maguet  ,     P.  ,     Roquilly  ,     A.  ,     Lasocki  ,     S.  ,     Asehnoune  ,     K.  , 
  Carise  ,    E.  ,    Saint  Martin  ,    M.  ,  ...    Seguin  ,    P  .  ( 2014 ).   Prev-
alence  and  impact  of  frailty  on  mortality  in  elderly  ICU  
patients:  A  prospective,  multicenter,  observational  study  .  
 Intensive Care Medicine ,   40 ( 5 ),   674 – 682 .  
    Liu  ,     H.  ,     Graber  ,     T.   G.  ,     Ferguson-Stegall  ,     L.  ,   &     Thompson  , 
  L.V  .  ( 2014 ).   Clinically  relevant  frailty  index  for  mice .   The 
Journal  of  Gerontology  Series  A:  Biological  Sciences  and  
Medical Sciences ,   69 ( 12 ),   1485 – 1491 .  
    Lomas  ,    J  .  ( 1993 ).   Diffusion,  dissemination,  and  implementa-
tion: Who should do what?   Annals of the New York Acad-
emy of Sciences ,   703 ,   226 – 237 .  
    López-Otín  ,    C.  ,    Blasco  ,    M.  A.  ,    Partridge  ,    L.  ,    Serrano  ,    M.  ,  & 
  Kroemer  ,    G  .  ( 2013 ).   The  hallmarks  of  aging .   Cell ,   153 ( 6 ), 
 1194 – 1217 .  
    Lurie  ,    I.  ,    Myers  ,    V.  ,    Goldbourt  ,    U.  ,  &    Gerber  ,    Y  .  ( 2014 ).   Per-
ceived social support following myocardial infarction 
and  long-term  development  of  frailty  .    European  Jour-
nal of Preventative Cardiology ,   22 ( 10 ),   1346 – 1353 .  
    Mallery  ,     L.  ,     Allen  ,     M.  ,     Fleming  ,     I.  ,     Kelly  ,     K.  ,     Bowless  ,     S.  , 
  Duncan  ,     J.  ,   &     Moorhouse  ,     P  .   ( 2014 ).    Promoting   higher 
blood pressure targets for frail older adults: A consensus 
guideline from Canada .  Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medi-
cine ,   81 ( 7 ),   427 – 437 .  
    Mallery  ,     L.   H.  ,   &     Moorhouse  ,     P  .   ( 2011 ).    Respecting   frailty . 
 Journal of Medical Ethics ,   37 ( 2 ),   126 – 128 .  
    Marcantonio  ,    E.  R  .  ( 2012 ).   Postoperative  delirium:  A  76-year-
old  woman  with  delirium  following  surgery  .    Journal  of  
the American Medical Association ,   308 ( 1 ),   73 – 81 .  
    Marcantonio  ,    E.  R.  ,    Lee  ,    G.  ,    Mangione  ,    C.  M.  ,    Ludwig  ,    L.  E.  , 
  Muraca  ,    B.  ,    Haslauer  ,    C.  M.  ,  ...    Lee  ,    T.  H  .  ( 1994 ).   A  clin-
ical  prediction  rule  for  delirium  after  elective  noncar-
diac surgery .  Journal of the American Medical Association , 
 271 ( 2 ),   134 – 139 .  
    Marmot  ,     M  .   ( 2004 ).    Status  syndrome:  How  your  social  stand-
ing directly affects your health and life expectancy .   London, 
England :   Bloomsbury .  
    Marmot  ,     M.   G.  ,   &     Shipley  ,     M.   J  .   ( 1996 ).    Do   socioeconomic 
differences in mortality persist after retirement? 25 year 
follow up of civil servants from the fi  rst Whitehall study . 
 British Medical Journal ,   313 ( 7066 ),   1177 – 1180 .  
    Marshall  ,    E.  G.  ,    Clarke  ,    B.  S.  ,    Varatharasan  ,    N.  ,  &    Andrew  , 
  M.  K  .  ( 2015 ).   A  Long-Term  Care-Comprehensive  Geriat-
ric Assessment (LTC-CGA) tool: Improving care for frail 
older adults?   Canadian Geriatrics Journal ,   18 ( 1 ),   2 – 10 .  
    Matusik  ,    P.  ,    Tomaszewski  ,    K.  ,    Chmielowska  ,    K.  ,    Nowak  ,    J.  , 
  Parnicka  ,    A.  ,    Dubiel  ,    M.  ,  ...    Grodzicki  ,    T  .  ( 2012 ).   Severe 
frailty  and  cognitive  impairment  are  related  to  higher  
mortality  in  12-month  follow-up  of  nursing  home  resi-
dents .   Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics ,   55 ( 1 ),   22 – 24 .  
    McCusker  ,      J.  ,      Bellavance  ,      F.  ,      Cardin  ,      S.  ,      Trepanier  ,      S.  ,   
Verdon  ,     J.  ,   &     Ardman  ,     O  .   ( 1999 ).    Detection   of   older 
people  at  increased  risk  of  adverse  health  outcomes  
after an emergency visit: The ISAR screening tool .  Jour-
nal of the American Geriatrics Society ,   47 ( 10 ),   1229 – 1237 .  
    McDermid  ,     R.   C.  ,     Stelfox  ,     H.   T.  ,   &     Bagshaw  ,     S.   M  .   ( 2011 ). 
 Frailty in the critically ill: A novel concept .  Critical Care , 
 15 ( 1 ),   301 .  
    McNally  ,     M.   E.  ,   &     Lahey  ,     W  .   ( 2014 ).    Frailty’s   place   in   ethics 
and law: Some thoughts on equality, autonomy and limits 
and  possibilities  for  ageing  citizens .  In    K.      Rockwood    &   
O.      Theou    (Eds.),   Frailty  in  ageing:  Biological,  clinical  and  
social  implications    (pp.    174 – 185 ).    Halifax,   NS :    Karger 
Medical and Scientifi c Publishers .  
      Minister  of  Employment  and  Immigration  .  (  1999  ).  Law  v.  
Canada: 1 SCR 497. Ottawa, ON: Author.  
    Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,     Collerton  ,     J.  ,     Martin-Ruiz  ,     C.  ,     Jagger  ,     C.  ,     von 
Zglinicki  ,     T.  ,     Rockwood  ,     K.  ,   &     Kirkwood  ,     T.   B  .   ( 2015 ). 
  Age-related  frailty  and  its  association  with  biological  
markers of ageing .  BMC Medicine ,   13 ( 161 ),   1 – 9 .  
    Mitnitski  ,    A.  B.  ,    Mogilner  ,    A.  J.  ,    MacKnight  ,    C.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  . 
( 2002 ).  The mortality rate as a function of accumulated 
defi  cits  in  a  frailty  index  .    Mechanisms  of  Ageing  and  De-
velopment ,   123 ( 11 ),   1457 – 1460 .  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      295 
    Moorhouse  ,    P.  ,  &    Mallery  ,    L.  H  .  ( 2012 ).   Palliative  and  thera-
peutic harmonization: A model for appropriate decision-
making  in  frail  older  adults  .    Journal  of  the  American  
Geriatrics Society ,   60 ( 12 ),   2326 – 2332 .  
    Morley  ,    J.  E.  ,    Vellas  ,    B.  ,    van  Kan  ,    G.  A.  ,    Anker  ,    S.  D.  ,    Bauer  , 
  J.  M.  ,    Bernabei  ,    R.  ,  ...  &    Waltson  ,    J  .  ( 2013 ).   Frailty  con-
sensus:  A  call  to  action  .    Journal  of  the  American  Medical  
Directors Association ,   14 ( 6 ),   392 – 397 .  
    Nichols  ,    B.  G.  ,    Varadarajan  ,    V.  ,    Bock  ,    J.  M.  ,  &    Blumin  ,    J.  H  . 
(  2015  ).    Dysphonia  in  nursing  home  and  assisted  living  
residents:  Prevalence  and  association  with  frailty  .    Jour-
nal of Voice ,   29 ( 1 ),   79 – 82 .  
    Oliver  ,    D  .  ( 2014 ).   Making  health  and  care  systems  fi  t  for  an  
ageing  population.  Why  we  wrote  it,  who  we  wrote  it  
for,  and  how  relevant  it  might  be  to  Canada  .    Canadian 
Geriatrics Journal ,   17 ( 4 ),   136 – 139 .  
    Parks  ,    R.  J.  ,    Fares  ,    E.  ,    Macdonald  ,    J.  K.  ,    Ernst  ,    M.  C.  ,    Sinal  ,    C.  J.  , 
  Rockwood  ,    K.  ,  &    Howlett  ,    S.  E  .  ( 2012 ).   A  procedure  for 
creating a frailty index based on defi cit accumulation in 
aging mice .  The Journal of Gerontology Series A: Biological 
Sciences and Medical Sciences ,   67 ( 3 ),   217 – 227 .  
    Patel  ,     K.   V.  ,     Brennan  ,     K.   L.  ,     Brennan  ,     M.   L.  ,     Jupiter  ,     D.   C.  , 
  Shar  ,    A.  ,  &    Davis  ,    M.  L  .  ( 2014 ).   Association  of  a  modifi ed 
frailty  index  with  mortality  after  femoral  neck  fracture  
in patients aged 60 years and older .  Clinical Orthopaedics 
and Related Research ,   472 ( 3 ),   1010 – 1017 .  
    Peek  ,     M.   K.  ,     Howrey  ,     B.   T.  ,     Ternent  ,     R.   S.  ,     Ray  ,     L.   A.  ,   &   
Ottenbacher  ,    K.  J  .  ( 2012 ).   Social  support,  stressors,  and 
frailty among older Mexican American adults .  Journal 
of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social 
Sciences ,   67 ( 6 ),   755 – 764 .  
    Pilotto  ,     A.  ,     Ferrucci  ,     L.  ,     Franceschi  ,     M.  ,     D’Ambrosio  ,     L.   P.  , 
  Scarcelli  ,    C.  ,    Cascavilla  ,    L.  ,  ...  &    Leandro  ,    G  .  ( 2008 ).   Devel-
opment and validation of a multidimensional prognos-
tic  index  for  1-year  mortality  from  the  comprehensive  
geriatric assessment in hospitalized older patients .  Reju-
venation Research ,   11 ( 1 ),   151 – 161 .  
    Putnam  ,    R.  D  .  ( 2000 ).   Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of 
American community .   New  York,  NY :   Simon  &  Schuster .  
    Ramage-Morin  ,    P.  L  .  ( 2006 ).   Successful  aging  in  health  care 
institutions .   Health Reports  (Statistics Canada, Catalogue 
82-003),  16 ( Suppl ),   47 – 56 .  
    Rennick  ,    D.  M.  ,  &    Fort  ,    M.  M  .  ( 2000 ).   Lessons  from  genet-
ically  engineered  animal  models.  XII.  IL-10-defi cient 
(IL-10(-/-) mice and intestinal infl ammation .  American 
Journal  of  Physiology:  Gastrointestinal  and  Liver  Physiol-
ogy ,   278 ( 6 ),   G829 – G833 .  
    Robertson  ,    D.  A.  ,    Savva  ,    G.  M.  ,  &    Kenny  ,    R.  A  .  ( 2013 ).   Frailty 
and cognitive impairment—A review of the evidence and 
causal mechanisms .  Ageing Research Reviews ,   12 ( 4 ),   840 – 851 .  
    Rockwood  ,     K  .   ( 2005a ).    An   unsuitable   old   age:   The   para-
doxes of elder care .  Canadian Medical Association Journal , 
 173 ( 12 ),   1500 – 1501 .  
    Rockwood  ,     K  .   ( 2005b ).    Frailty   and   its   defi nition: A  worthy 
challenge .   Journal of the American Geriatrics Society ,   53 ( 6 ), 
 1069 – 1070 .  
    Rockwood  ,     K  .   ( 2005c ).    What   would   make   a   defi nition  of 
frailty successful?   Age and Ageing ,   34 ( 5 ),   432 – 434 .  
    Rockwood  ,     K.  ,    Abeysundera  ,     M.   J.  ,   &     Mitnitski  ,    A  .   ( 2007 ). 
 How should we grade frailty in nursing home patients?  
 Journal of the American Medical Directors Association ,   8 ( 9 ), 
 595 – 603 .  
    Rockwood  ,    K.  ,    MacMillan  ,    M.  ,    Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,  &    Howlett  ,    S.  E  . 
(  2015  ).    A  frailty  index  based  on  common  laboratory  
tests in comparison with a clinical frailty index for older 
adults in long-term care facilities .  Journal of the American 
Medical Directors Association ,   16 ( 10 ),   842 – 847 .  
    Rockwood  ,    K.  ,    Silvius  ,    J.  L.  ,  &    Fox  ,    R.  A  .  ( 1998 ).   Comprehen-
sive geriatric assessment. Helping your elderly patients 
maintain  functional  well-being  .    Postgraduate  Medicine , 
 103 ( 3 ),   247 – 249 .  
    Rockwood  ,     K.  ,     Song  ,     X.  ,     MacKnight  ,     C.  ,     Bergman  ,     H.  , 
  Hogan  ,     D.   B.  ,     McDowell  ,     I.  ,   &     Mitnitski  ,     A  .   ( 2005 ).  
A global clinical measure of fi tness and frailty in elderly 
people .    Canadian  Medical  Association  Journal ,    173 ( 5 ), 
 489 – 495 .  
    Rockwood  ,     K.  ,     Song  ,     X.  ,   &     Mitnitski  ,    A  .   ( 2011 ).    Changes 
in relative fi tness and frailty across the adult lifespan: 
Evidence  from  the  Canadian  National  Population  Health  
Survey .    Canadian  Medical  Association  Journal ,    183 ( 8 ), 
 E487 – E494 .  
    Rockwood  ,    M.  R.  ,    MacDonald  ,    E.  ,    Sutton  ,    E.  ,    Rockwood  ,    K.  , 
  Baron  ,     M.     &    Canadian   Scleroderma   Research   Group . 
(  2014  ).    Frailty  index  to  measure  health  status  in  people  
with systemic sclerosis .  The Journal of Rheumatology ,   41 ( 4 ), 
 698 – 705 .  
    Rodríguez-Mañas  ,    L.  ,    Féart  ,    C.  ,    Mann  ,    G.  ,    Viña  ,    J.  ,    Chatterji  ,    S.  , 
  Chodzko-Zajko  ,     W.  ,   ...   &     Vega  ,     E  .   ( 2013 ).    Searching 
for   an   operational   defi   nition   of   frailty:   A   Delphi   
method  based  consensus  statement.  The  frailty  opera-
tive defi nition-consensus conference project .  The Journal 
of  Gerontology  A.  Biological  Sciences  &  Medical  Sciences , 
 68 ( 1 ),   62 – 67 .  
    Rolfson  ,    D.  B.  ,    Majumdar  ,    S.  R.  ,    Tsuyuki  ,    R.  T.  ,    Tahir  ,    A.  ,  & 
  Rockwood  ,     K  .   ( 2006 ).    Validity   and   reliability   of   the 
Edmonton Frail Scale .  Age and Ageing ,   35 ( 5 ),   526 – 529 .  
    Romero-Ortuno  ,     R.  ,   &     Soraghan  ,     C.   A  .   ( 2014 ).    Frailty 
instrument  for  primary  care  for  those  aged  75  years  
or more: Findings from the Survey of Health, Ageing 
and Retirement in Europe, a longitudinal population-
based cohort study (SHARE-FI75+) .  BMJ Open ,   4 ( 12 ), 
 e006645 .  
    Rudolph  ,    J.  L.  ,    Jones  ,    R.  N.  ,    Levkoff  ,    S.  E.  ,    Rockett  ,    C.  ,    Inouye  , 
  S.  K.  ,    Sellke  ,    F.  W.  ,  ...    Marcantonio  ,    E.  R  .  ( 2009 ).   Deri-
vation and validation of a preoperative prediction rule 
for  delirium  after  cardiac  surgery  .    Circulation ,    119 ( 2 ), 
 229 – 236 .  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
 296      Canadian Journal on Aging 35 (3)John Muscedere et al.
    Sabia  ,    S.  ,    Singh-Manoux  ,    A.  ,    Hagger-Johnson  ,    G.  ,    Cambois  ,    E.  , 
  Brunner  ,     E.   J.  ,   &     Kivimaki  ,     M  .   ( 2012 ).    Infl uence  of 
individual  and  combined  healthy  behaviours  on  success-
ful  aging  .    Canadian  Medical  Association  Journal ,    184 ( 18 ), 
 1985 – 1992 .  
    Salem  ,    B.  E.  ,    Nyamathi  ,    A.  M.  ,    Brecht  ,    M.  L.  ,    Phillips  ,    L.  R.  , 
  Mentes  ,     J.   C.  ,     Sarkisian  ,     C.  ,   &     Leake  ,     B  .   ( 2013 ).    Corre-
lates of frailty among homeless adults .  Western Journal of 
Nursing Research ,   35 ( 9 ),   1128 – 1152 .  
    Saum  ,    K.  U.  ,    Dieffenbach  ,    A.  K.  ,    Müezzinler  ,    A.  ,    Müller  ,    H.  , 
  Holleczek  ,     B.  ,     Stegmaier  ,     C.  ,   ...   &     Brenner  ,     H  .   ( 2014 ). 
  Frailty  and  telomere  length:  Cross-sectional  analysis  in  
3537 older adults from the ESTHER cohort .  Experimental 
Gerontology ,   58 ,   250 – 255 .  
    Schoufour  ,    J.  D.  ,    Evenhuis  ,    H.  M.  ,  &    Echteld  ,    M.  A  .  ( 2014 ). 
  The  impact  of  frailty  on  care  intensity  in  older  people  
with  intellectual  disabilities  .    Research  in  Developmental  
Disabilities ,   35 ( 12 ),   3455 – 3461 .  
    Searle  ,    S.  ,    Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,    Gahbauer  ,    E.  ,    Gill  ,    T.  ,  &    Rockwood  ,    K  . 
( 2008 ).  A standard procedure for creating a frailty index . 
 BMC Geriatrics ,   8 ( 24 ),   1 – 10 .  
    Sepehri  ,    A.  ,    Beggs  ,    T.  ,    Hassan  ,    A.  ,    Rigatto  ,    C.  ,    Shaw-Daigle  ,    C.  , 
  Tangri  ,     N.  ,   &    Arora  ,     R.   C  .   ( 2014 ).    The   impact   of   frailty 
on  outcomes  after  cardiac  surgery:  A  systematic  review  .  
 The  Journal  of  Thoracic  and  Cardiovascular  Surgery ,   148 ( 6 ), 
 3110 – 3117 .  
    Shim  ,    J.  K.  ,    Russ  ,    A.  J.  ,  &    Kaufman  ,    S.  R  .  ( 2006 ).   Risk,  life 
extension and the pursuit of medical possibility .  Sociol-
ogy Health Illness ,   28 ( 4 ),   479 – 502 .  
    Silvester  ,      K.    M.  ,      Mohammed  ,      M.    A.  ,      Harriman  ,      P.  ,   
Girolami  ,    A.  ,  &    Downes  ,    T.  W  .  ( 2014 ).   Timely  care  for 
frail  older  people  referred  to  hospital  improves  effi -
ciency and reduces mortality without the need for extra 
resources .   Age and Ageing ,   43 ( 4 ),   472 – 477 .  
    Sinha  ,    M  .  ( 2012 ).   Portrait  of  caregivers,  2012  .  Retrieved  from  
 http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/89-652-x/89-652-
x2013001-eng.htm   
    Sinha  ,    S.  K.  ,    Bessman  ,    E.  S.  ,    Flomenbaum  ,    N.  ,  &    Leff  ,    B  .  ( 2011 ). 
  A  systematic  review  and  qualitative  analysis  to  inform  
the development of a new emergency department-based 
geriatric  case  management  model  .    Annals  of  Emergency  
Medicine ,   57 ( 6 ),   672 – 682 .  
    Sinha  ,    S.  K.  ,    Oakes  ,    S.  L.  ,    Suh  ,    T.  ,  &    Chaudhry  ,    S  .  ( 2014 ). 
  How  to  use  the  ACE  unit  to  improve  hospital  safety  
and quality for older patients: From ACE units to elder-
friendly  hospitals .  In    M.  L.      Malone  ,    E.  A.      Capezuti  ,  & 
  R.   M.       Palmer     (Eds.),    Acute  care  for  elders:  A  model  for  
interdisciplinary care   (pp.   131 – 156 ).   New  York,  NY :   Humana 
Press .  
    Sligl  ,    W.  I.  ,    Eurich  ,    D.  T.  ,    Marrie  ,    T.  J.  ,  &    Majumdar  ,    S.  R  . 
(  2011  ).    Only  severely  limited,  premorbid  functional  
status is associated with short- and long-term mortality 
in patients with pneumonia who are critically ill: A pro-
spective observational study .  Chest ,   139 ( 1 ),   88 – 94 .  
   Special   Senate   Committee   on   Aging    ( 2009 ).    Canada’s  aging  
population: Seizing the opportunity .   Ottawa,  ON :   Senate  of 
Canada .  
   Statistics  Canada .  ( 2001 ).   2001 Census of Canada.    Ottawa,  ON : 
 Author .  
   Statistics  Canada .  ( 2011 ).   Living arrangements of seniors: Fam-
ilies, households and marital status. Structural type of dwell-
ing and collectives, 2011 census of population .   Ottawa,  ON : 
 Author .  
    Steverink  ,    N.  ,    Slaets  ,    J.  P.  J.  ,    Schuurmans  ,    H.  ,  &    van  Lis  ,    M  . 
(  2001  ).    Measuring  frailty.  Development  and  testing  of  
the   Groningen   Frailty   Indicator   (GFI)   .      Gerontologist , 
 41 ( 1 ),   236 – 237 .  
    St.  John  ,    P.  D.  ,    Montgomery  ,    P.  R.  ,  &    Tyas  ,    S.  L  .  ( 2013 ).   Social 
position  and  frailty  .    Canadian  Journal  on  Aging ,    32 ( 3 ), 
 250 – 259 .  
    Strain  ,    L.  A.  ,    Maxwell  ,    C.  J.  ,    Wanless  ,    D.  ,    Gilbart  ,    E.  ,  &   Alberta 
Continuing  Care  Epidemiological  Studies  (ACCES)  
Research  Group .  ( 2015 ).   Designated Assisted Living (DAL) 
and  long-term  care  in  Alberta:  Selected  highlights  from  the  
Alberta Continuing Care Epidemiological Studies (ACCES) . 
Retrieved  from    http://www.ab-cca.ca/uploads/fi les/
Documents/ACCES%20Final%20Report%202011.pdf   
    Stuck  ,     A.   E.  ,     Siu  ,     A.   L.  ,     Wieland  ,     G.   D.  ,     Adams  ,     J.  ,   & 
  Rubenstein  ,      L.    Z  .    ( 1993 ).     Comprehensive    geriatric 
assessment: A meta-analysis of controlled trials .  Lancet , 
 342 ( 8878 ),   1032 – 1036 .  
    Subra  ,     J.  ,     Gillette-Guyonnet  ,     S.  ,     Cesari  ,     M.  ,     Oustric  ,     S.  ,   & 
  Vellas  ,     B  .   ( 2012 ).    The   integration   of   frailty   into   clinical 
practice:  Preliminary  results  from  the  Gérontopôle  .    The 
Journal of Nutrition Health and Aging ,   16 ( 8 ),   714 – 720 .  
    Subramanian  ,    S.  V.  ,    Kim  ,    D.  J.  ,  &    Kawachi  ,    I  .  ( 2002 ).   Social  trust 
and  self-rated  health  in  US  communities:  A  multilevel  
analysis .   Journal of Urban Health ,   79 ( Suppl  1 ),   S21 – S34 .  
    Tabue-Teguo  ,    M.  ,    Kelaiditi  ,    E.  ,    Demougeot  ,    L.  ,    Dartigues  ,    J.  F.  , 
  Vellas  ,    B.  ,  &    Cesari  ,    M  .  ( 2015 ,  July  1).   Frailty  index  and 
mortality  in  nursing  home  residents  in  France:  Results  
from  the  INCUR  study  .    Journal  of  the  American  Medical  
Directors  Association ,    16 ( 7 ),    603 – 606 .   doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.
2015.02.002  (Epub 2015 Mar 10)  
    Tjam  ,     E.  Y.  ,     Heckman  ,     G.  A.  ,     Smith  ,     S.  ,    Arai  ,     B.  ,     Hirdes  ,     J.  , 
  Poss  ,    J.  ,  &    McKelvie  ,    R.  S  .  ( 2012 ).   Predicting  heart  fail-
ure  mortality  in  frail  seniors:  Comparing  the  NYHA  
functional  classifi  cation  with  the  Resident  Assessment  
Instrument  (RAI)  2.0  .    International  Journal  of  Cardiology , 
 155 ( 1 ),   75 – 80 .  
    Theou  ,     O.  ,     Brothers  ,     T.   D.  ,     Mitnitski  ,     A.  ,   &     Rockwood  ,     K  . 
(  2013  ).    Operationalization  of  frailty  using  eight  com-
monly used scales and comparison of their ability to pre-
dict all-cause mortality .  Journal of the American Geriatrics 
Society ,   61 ( 9 ),   1537 – 1551 .  
    Theou  ,     O.  ,     Brothers  ,     T.   D.  ,     Peña  ,     F.   G.  ,     Mitnitski  ,     A.  ,   & 
  Rockwood  ,    K  .  ( 2014 ).   Identifying  common  characteristics 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Screening for FrailtyLa Revue canadienne du vieillissement 35 (3)      297 
of frailty across seven scales .  Journal of the American Geri-
atrics Society ,   62 ( 5 ),   901 – 906 .  
    Theou  ,     O.  ,     Brothers  ,     T.   D.  ,     Rockwood  ,     M.   R.  ,     Haardt  ,     D.  , 
  Mitnitski  ,    A.  ,   &     Rockwood  ,     K  .   ( 2013 ).    Exploring   the 
relationship  between  national  economic  indicators  and  
relative  fi  tness  and  frailty  in  middle-aged  and  older  
Europeans .   Age and Ageing ,   42 ( 5 ),   614 – 619 .  
    Tricco  ,    A.  C.  ,    Antony  ,    J.  ,    Ivers  ,    N.  M.  ,    Ashoor  ,    H.  ,    Khan  ,    P.  , 
  Blondal  ,     E.  ,   ...     Straus  ,     S  .   ( 2014 ).    Effectiveness   of   qual-
ity  improvement  strategies  for  coordination  of  care  to  
reduce use of health care services: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis .  Canadian Medical Association Journal , 
 186 ( 15 ),   E568 – E578 .  
    Turner  ,    G.  ,  &    Clegg  ,    A  .  ( 2014 ).   Best  practice  guidelines  for  the 
management of frailty: A British Geriatrics Society, Age 
UK  and  Royal  College  of  General  Practitioners  report  .  
 Age and Ageing ,   43 ( 6 ),   744 – 747 .  
    Wallis  ,     S.   J.  ,     Wall  ,     J.  ,     Biram  ,     R.   W.  ,   &     Romero-Ortuno  ,     R  . 
( 2015 ).  Association of the clinical frailty scale with hos-
pital outcomes .  QJM: An International Journal of Medicine . 
 http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qjmed/hcv066   (First  pub-
lished online: March 15, 2015)  
    Walsh  ,    T.  S.  ,    Salisbury  ,    L.  G.  ,    Merriweather  ,    J.  L.  ,    Boyd  ,    J.  A.  , 
  Griffi  th  ,    D.  M.  ,    Huby  ,    G.  ,  ...    Ramsay  ,    P  .  ( 2015 ).   Increased 
hospital-based  physical  rehabilitation  and  information  
provision  after  intensive  care  unit  discharge:  The  
RECOVER randomized clinical trial .  Journal of the American 
Medical Association: Internal Medicine ,   175 ( 6 ),   901 – 910 .  
    Walston  ,     J.  ,     Fedarko  ,     N.  ,     Yang  ,     H.  ,     Leng  ,     S.  ,     Beamer  ,     B.  , 
  Espinoza  ,    S.  ,  ...  &    Becker  ,    K  .  ( 2008 ).   The  physical  and 
biological  characterization  of  a  frail  mouse  model  .  
 The Journal of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and 
Medical Sciences ,   63A ( 4 ),   391 – 398 .  
    Whitehead  ,    J.  C.  ,    Hildebrand  ,    B.  A.  ,    Sun  ,    M.  ,    Rockwood  ,    M.  R.  , 
  Rose  ,     R.   A.  ,     Rockwood  ,     K.  ,   &     Howlett  ,     S.   E  .   ( 2014 ).  
A  clinical  frailty  index  in  aging  mice:  Comparisons  
with frailty index data in humans .  The Journal of Geron-
tology  Series  A:  Biological  Sciences  and  Medical  Sciences , 
 69 ( 6 ),   621 – 632 .  
    Winograd  ,    C.  H.  ,    Gerety  ,    M.  B.  ,    Chung  ,    M.  ,    Goldstein  ,    M.  K.  , 
  Dominguez  ,     F.  ,   &     Vallone  ,     R  .   ( 1991 ).    Screening   for 
frailty: Criteria and predictors of outcomes .  Journal of the 
American Geriatrics Society ,   39 ( 8 ),   778 – 784 .  
    Wolinsky  ,    F.  D.  ,    Stump  ,    T.  E.  ,  &    Johnson  ,    R.  J  .  ( 1995 ).   Hospital 
utilization profi les among older adults over time: Con-
sistency  and  volume  among  survivors  and  decedents  .  
 Journal  of  Gerontology  Series  B:  Psychological  Sciences  and  
Social Sciences ,   50 ( 2 ),   S88 – S100 .  
    Woo  ,    J.  ,    Goggins  ,    W.  ,    Sham  ,    A.  ,  &    Ho  ,    S.  C  .  ( 2005 ).   Social 
determinants of frailty .  Gerontology ,   51 ( 6 ),   402 – 408 .  
    Woo  ,     J.  ,     Tang  ,     N.   L.  ,     Suen  ,     E.  ,     Leung  ,     J.   C.  ,   &     Leung  ,     P.   C  . 
( 2008 ).   Telomeres  and  frailty .   Mechanisms  of  Ageing  and  
Development ,   129 ( 11 ),   642 – 648 .  
    You  ,    J.  J.  ,    Fowler  ,    R.  A.  ,  &    Heyland  ,    D.  K  .  ( 2014 ).   Just  ask: 
Discussing goals of care with patients in hospital with 
serious  illness  .    Canadian  Medical  Association  Journal , 
 186 ( 6 ),   425 – 432 .  
    Zaslavsky  ,    O.  ,    Cochrane  ,    B.  B.  ,    Thompson  ,    H.  J.  ,    Woods  ,    N.  F.  , 
  Herting  ,    J.  R.  ,  &    LaCroix  ,    A  .  ( 2013 ).   Frailty:  A  review  of 
the fi rst decade of research .  
Biological Research for Nurs-
ing ,   15 ( 4 ),   422 – 432 .    
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0714980816000301 Published online by Cambridge University Press