REVIEW ARTICLE
Immunotherapy
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
Nicholas Tokarew
1
, Justyna Ogonek
1
, Stefan Endres
1
, Michael von Bergwelt-Baildon
2
and Sebastian Kobold
1
Adoptive T cell therapy (ACT) refers to the therapeutic use of T cells. T cells genetically engineered to express chimeric antigen
receptors (CAR) constitute the most clinically advanced form of ACT approved to date for the treatment of CD19-positive
leukaemias and lymphomas. CARs are synthetic receptors that are able to confer antigen-binding and activating functions on T cells
with the aim of therapeutically targeting cancer cells. Several factors are essential for CAR T cell therapy to be effective, such as
recruitment, activation, expansion and persistence of bioengineered T cells at the tumour site. Despite the advances made in CAR
T cell therapy, however, most tumour entities still escape immune detection and elimination. A number of strategies counteracting
these problems will need to be addressed in order to render T cell therapy effective in more situations than currently possible. Non-
haematological tumours are also the subject of active investigation, but ACT has so far shown only marginal success rates in these
cases. New approaches are needed to enhance the ability of ACT to target solid tumours without increasing toxicity, by improving
recognition, infiltration, and persistence within tumours, as well as an enhanced resistance to the suppressive tumour
microenvironment.
British Journal of Cancer(2019) 120:26–37; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-018-0325-1
INTRODUCTION
Immunotherapy has become an established part of the standard
care for a number of different cancers, including melanoma, non-
small cell lung cancer and kidney cancer.
1
The implementation of
T cell-activating strategies followed the discovery that tumour-
mediated immunosuppression occurs across most tumour enti-
ties.
2
The development of antibodies to components of inhibitory
checkpoints such as programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) has
led to unparalleled response rates and efficacy in patients who
would otherwise be refractory to treatment.
3,4
Consequently,
there has been a paradigm shift in oncology with the establish-
ment of T cells as both a therapeutic target of antibodies and an
effector mechanism against the cancer cell; in this latter context,
T cells are able to directly trigger apoptosis of tumour cells
through  granule  exocytosis  (perforin,  granzyme)  or  death
ligand–death receptor (Fas–FasL, TRAIL) systems.
5
Building on this success, the direct therapeutic use of T cells, in
a therapy referred to as adoptive T cell therapy (ACT), would
appear as a logical progression. Three forms of ACT currently exist:
first,  the  use  of  tumour-specific  T  cells  (tumour-infiltrating
lymphocytes, TILs) isolated from a patient’s resected tumour,
which are expanded in vitro and therapeutically reinfused;
6
second, the genetic engineering of T cells isolated from peripheral
blood to express a T cell receptor (TCR) that recognises a specific
cancer antigen;
7
or, third, the genetic engineering of T cells using
fully synthetic chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) consisting of an
antigen-binding domain fused to T cell-activating moieties.
8
The use of TILs wasfirst reported in the late 1980s,
6
but the
difficulties in reproducibly yielding TILs across different patients
and types of cancer, as well as the burden of standardisation,
given the variance in quantity and quality of the starting tissue,
explains the slow clinical development of this approach. By
contrast, CAR T cells have been tested in a wide range of cancer
types, especially haematological malignancies. CARs specific for
CD19 (also known as B-lymphocyte antigen CD19) have induced
high remission rates (over 80%) in patients with treatment-
refractory acute lymphocytic leukaemia (ALL) or diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.
9,10
Although it still remains to be proven, it is very
likely that these remission rates will also prolong overall survival
for  these  otherwise  untreatable  patient  populations.  These
findings have prompted the FDA to approve anti-CD19 CAR
T cells as thefirst T cell therapy even for refractory ALL and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.
11,12
More CARs are currently undergoing
clinical development for the treatment of other haematological
entities, such as chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, or low grade
lymphomas and myeloma.
13,14
It is consequently likely that there
will be an increase in approvals for the use of CAR T cells across a
wider array of malignancies.
However, although the efficacy of CAR T cell therapy is
unchallenged for a number of haematological malignancies, it is
important to  realise that, with  over 100  types  of cancer,
haematological  cancers  comprise  only  a  small  fraction  of
diagnosed cancers and are responsible for only 6% of all reported
deaths.
15
Attempts over the past couple of years to treat solid
malignancies with CAR T cells have resulted in elevated toxicities
and a minimal observable therapeutic benefit for patients,
16,17
highlighting  the  heterogeneity  inherent  in  the  therapeutic
response of different cancer types. Here, we review the evolution
www.nature.com/bjc
Received: 30 May 2018 Revised: 24 September 2018 Accepted: 25 September 2018
Published online: 9 November 2018
1
Center of Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPS-M) and Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Klinikum der Universität München, Lindwurmstrasse 2a, 80337 Munich, Germany
and
2
Department of Medicine III, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany
Correspondence: Sebastian Kobold (Sebastian.kobold@med.uni-muenchen.de)
These authors contributed equally: Nicholas Tokarew, Justyna Ogonek
©Cancer Research UK 2018
of the CAR T cell over time, with a particular focus on the current
limitations of CAR T cell therapy in solid tumours and strategies to
overcome these limitations.
EVOLUTION OF CAR T CELL DEVELOPMENT
CARs  are  bioengineered  receptors  with  specificity  directed
towards a desired antigen. Thefirst CARs were generated some
30 years ago and have subsequently undergone a stepwise
evolution in their development.
1,18
The versatility of CARs stems
from the fact that, unlike innate TCRs, they can recognise antigens
in the absence of presentation by the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC).
18
This is a particular advantage when MHC
expression is lost as a result of the immunosuppressive network of
cancer cells.
19
CARs comprise three main components: the
extracellular domain, which is responsible for antigen recognition,
the transmembrane domain, and the intracellular signalling
domain.
20
The extracellular region can be further segmented into
the signal peptide, which is cleaved from the mature CAR
expressed at the cell surface,
21
and the antigen-recognition
domain.  The  antigen-recognition  domain  is  a  single-chain
fragment variant (scFV) predominantly composed of the variable
light and heavy chain regions of an antigen-specific immunoglo-
bulin separated by aflexible linker, and is tethered to the
transmembrane domain through the spacer, which transmits the
receptor-binding signal.
20
The transmembrane domain is usually a
hydrophobic alpha helix that spans the cell membrane and is
fundamental for surface expression and stability of the recep-
tor.
20,22
The third region is the intracellular domain (or endodo-
main). Following antigen binding, the intracellular domain clusters
and undergoes conformational changes, which enables down-
stream signalling proteins to be recruited and phosphorylated.
23,24
The endodomain can contain several functional units. The
intracellular domain of the T cell co-receptor CD3ζ, which contains
three immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs)
that are important for signal transduction, is the core component
of most CARs
20
(Fig.1a).
The progress in the development of CARs over the past three
decades can be roughly grouped intofive CAR generations based
on the structure and composition of the endodomain.
20
Thefirst
generation of CARs contained a single CD3ζintracellular domain.
Initial experiments withfirst-generation CAR T cells showed low
cytotoxicity and proliferation owing to the lack of co-stimulatory
(e.g. CD27, CD28, CD134, CD137) and cytokine (e.g. interleukin (IL)-
2) signalling.
20,25
A second generation of CARs was generated to
enhance T cell proliferation and cytotoxicity by adding a co-
stimulatory domain such as sections of CD28 or CD137 to the
intracellular signalling domain.
26–28
The third generation of CARs
further expanded on the second generation by adding a third
intracellular signalling sequence of an additional co-stimulatory
domain such as CD134 or CD137.
20
The fourth generation of CARs
is based on second-generation CARs, but includes a protein, such
as  interleukin  12  (IL-12)  that  is  constitutively  or  inducibly
expressed upon CAR activation. T cells transduced with these
fourth-generation CARs are referred to as T cells redirected for
universal cytokine-mediated killing (TRUCKs). Activation of these
CARs promotes the production and secretion of the desired
cytokine to promote tumour killing though several synergistic
mechanisms such as exocytosis (perforin, granzyme) or death
ligand–death receptor (Fas–FasL, TRAIL) systems.
5,25
TRUCKs will
be further  discussed  in a separate  section below. Afifth
generation of CARs is currently being explored; these are based
on the second generation of CARs, but they contain a truncated
cytoplasmic IL-2 receptorβ-chain domain with a binding site for
the transcription factor STAT3. The antigen-specific activation
of  this  receptor  simultaneously  triggers  TCR  (through  the
CD3ζdomains), co-stimulatory (CD28 domain) and cytokine
(JAK–STAT3/5) signalling,
29
which effectively provides all three
synergistic signals (further discussed below) required physiologi-
cally to drive full T cell activation and proliferation. Additional
variants of the aforementioned CARs, such as dual CARs, split CARs
and inducible-split CARs, have been generated to further enhance
the specificity and control of the transfused T cells. These CARs will
be discussed in greater detail below
18
(Fig.1b).
In the past three decades, CARs have progressed from their
initial characterisation to FDA approval for use in patients. In spite
of these advances, however, it is important to bear in mind that
the novel CAR designs and improvements in recent generations as
seen in in vitro or in animal models have not been further
corroborated in patients. In other words, no study has yet
comparedfirst or subsequent generation CARs specific for a single
antigen in a clinical study, which prevents a proper comparison
across the different generations of CARs and obscures the
selection of optimal combinations for future clinical trials. Thus,
any consideration of the use of a given CAR generation is based
on preclinical animal models and not clinical data. Currently it is
unclear which design would provide the best clinical benefit for
patient outcome.
LIMITATIONS TO CAR T CELL THERAPY IN SOLID TUMOURS
A recent clinical trial treating patients suffering from acute B-cell
lymphoblastic leukaemia with CD19-specific CAR T cells have
shown an unprecedented clinical outcome, with 81% of 75 treated
patients going into complete remission and minimal residual
disease negativity.
11,30
By contrast, several attempts to treat solid
cancers withfirst-generation CAR T cells directed against several
antigens (carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), CD171, folate receptor
alpha (FR-α), GD2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2), mesothelin, EGFRvIII or vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 2 (VEGF-R2))
31
did not significantly benefit patients,
showing limited activity and frequent toxicity.
32–34
Using TCR-
modified T cells, clinical trials have also reported severe, even
lethal toxicities.
35
A TCR targeting the cancer testis antigen NY-
ESO-1 showed promising results across trials and entities, and
objective responses were observed in melanoma, sarcoma and
myeloma, but otherwise responses have been anecdotal.
36
In any case, targeting solid tumours with either approach
presents a number of challenges not encountered when targeting
blood  malignancies.  The  hypoxic,  poorly  vascularised  and
extracellular  matrix-rich  tumour  microenvironment  prevents
T cells from infiltrating the tumour tissue. Even for such T cells
that do reach the tumour, the loss of tumour antigens prevents
their specific recognition. Furthermore, inhibitory surface proteins,
cytokines or soluble products of disrupted cell metabolism within
the tumour can impair the activation and persistence of T cells.
The need to enhance T cell recruitment into solid malignancies is
highlighted by the observation that elevated lymphocyte infiltra-
tion is a powerful positive prognostic marker in various cancer
subtypes (e.g. breast cancer, colorectal cancer, ovarian cancer,
non-small cell lung cancer, melanoma and others).
37,38
Accord-
ingly, there is an extensive body of literature which is focused on
transforming  immune-scarce‘cold’tumours  into  immune-
abundant‘hot’tumours,
39
a subject which will be discussed in
greater detail below. A detailed collection of overall strategies
outside of ACT has been recently reviewed.
40,41
The importance of increased tumour recognition by T cells is
underscored by several adaptive techniques adopted by cancer
cells to circumvent immune detection, such as the aforemen-
tioned downregulation of MHC-associated antigen presentation.
19
This is also further exemplified by encouraging results of phase II
clinical trials of some cancer vaccines such as Canvaxin and GVAX,
which were used to treat melanoma and prostate cancer,
respectively.
42,43
The mechanism of action of cancer vaccines is
thought  to  drive  antigen  cross  presentation  and  diversity,
enabling the establishment of a protective immunity against
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
27
1234567890();,:
cancer.
44
Although the phase II clinical trials of Canvaxin and
GVAX showed encouraging results, the phase III clinical trials of
both cancer vaccines failed to demonstrate a survival benefit.
Along the same lines, a multipeptide vaccine showed promising
activity in phase I/II trials, paralleled by the induction of immune
responses,
45
but the phase III trial failed to achieve its primary
endpoint, presumably due to low immunogenicity.
45
These
exemplary results indicate the correlation between the induction
of a specific immune response and benefit to vaccine therapy, but
at the same time question the overall therapeutic benefit of this
approach to treat solid malignancies.
46,47
In addition, the need to
enhance T cell activation and persistence has been illustrated by
the unprecedented success rate of trials of therapies that target
immune inhibitory checkpoint proteins such as PD-1.
3,4,48
Finally,
many of the aforementioned notions are related to the ability of a
cancer to directly alter its microenvironment, driving immune cell
exclusion and reducing antigen presentation and lymphocyte
activation.
49
Based on these experiences and on preclinical
studies,five important concepts have been identified which will
need to be addressed to employ engineered T cells as a viable
therapy for solid tumours (Fig.2): improving T cell recruitment to
tumours; enhancing T cell survival and activation; increasing
tumour cell antigen recognition; implementing control strategies;
and counteracting the immunosuppressive microenvironment.
IMPROVEMENT OF T CELL TRAFFICKING TO SOLID TUMOURS
Immune infiltrate is typically low or absent in tumour biopsy
samples from patients who do not respond to immune checkpoint
blockade therapy,
18
and is a prognostic factor for poor overall
survival.
50
For immune therapy to be effective, effector T cells
need to reach their target cells. Unsurprisingly, if CAR T cells
cannot access their target cells, it is very unlikely that they will be
effective at controlling tumour growth. A recent strategy to
promote immune cell recruitment to tumours takes advantage of
cancer chemokine signalling.
50
Chemokines are cytokines with
chemotactic abilities, and are involved in regulating migration and
trafficking of various immune cells and some somatic cells.
50
Extracellular
domain
Variable heavy chain
a
b
Variable light
chain
ITAM
Transmembrane
domain
Endodomain
First-generation
CAR
ITAM
CM1
CM2
CM1CM1
STAT3/5
JAK
IL-12
inducer
IL-2Rβ
ITAM
ITAM
E.g., IL-12
CM1
ITAM
ITAM
Second-generation
CAR
Third-generation
CAR
Fourth-generation
CAR
Fifth-generation CAR
or next-generation
CAR
Fig. 1Structure of different chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) generations.aThe core structure of a CAR, highlighting the major components
of the extracellular domain, the transmembrane domain and the intracellular domain (endodomain).bEvolution of the development of CARs
from thefirst generation, which contained only ITAM motifs in the intracellular domain. Second-generation CARs included one co-stimulatory
molecule (CM)1, and third-generation CARs contained a second CM. The fourth generation of CARs was based on second-generation CARs
(containing 1–3 ITAMs) paired with a constitutively or inducibly expressed chemokine (e.g. IL-12). These T cells are also referred to as T cell
redirected for universal cytokine-mediated killing (TRUCKs). Thefifth, or‘next generation’, is also based on the second generation of CARs,
with the addition of intracellular domains of cytokine receptors (e.g. IL-2Rβchain fragment). ITAM immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation
motifs, CD co-stimulatory domain, IL-12 activation of interleukin 12 transcription, IL-2Rβtruncated intracellular interleukin 2βchain receptor
with a STAT3/5 binding motif
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
28
Several studies have shown that tumour cells can produce
chemokines, either themselves or through their stroma, which
signal back to the cancer cells to promote cancer cell proliferation,
survival, progression and migration.
50,51
Some of these chemo-
kines can promote the recruitment of immune-suppressive cells,
which further enhances the immune-suppressive tumour environ-
ment.
50
Approaches by us and others have sought to utilise the
tumour chemokine signalling network to drive T cell recruitment
by engineering the expression of a cognate chemokine receptor—
CCR2,
52
CCR2b,
53,54
CCR4,
55,56
CCR7,
57
CXCR2
58
or CXCR4
59
—on
the surface of CAR T cells (Fig.1). Recently, CXCR3 has also gained
considerable attention in enhancing ACT.
60
This interest stems
from the observation that PD-1 blockade and/or chemotherapy
has been shown to promote ACT recruitment in a CXCR3-ligand-
dependent manner.
61,62
A growing body of evidence corroborates
the observation that the chemokine landscape within a given
tumour can be extremely heterogenous,
63
illustrating the need to
identify specific candidates and strategies to enhance T cell
infiltration into different cancers, which will vary from patient to
patient.
While transgenic chemokine receptors come with the promise
of directed recruitment to a desired site, the non-tumour
specificity of chemokines might‘distract’T cells from their
intended tumour target.
64
Undesired effects might thus range
from reduced activity through to novel toxicities, which is a
particular risk when the primary target of the T cell is not tumour-
specific. T cell entry into non-inflamed or non-tumour tissues is
low under steady-state conditions.
65
One might hypothesise that
true added toxicities might especially arise when this state is
disrupted, in the case of injury or autoimmune disorders.
66,67
Such
patients will need to be excluded from thefirst clinical trials
dealing with chemokine-receptor-transduced T cells. Along the
same lines, T cells will naturally utilise endogenously expressed
chemokine receptors to traffic, and this process might compete
with the newly introduced receptor.
68
Although not yet seen in
studies published so far, a careful analysis of the homing
behaviour of such cells will need to be considered. From the
safety perspective, the consequences of aberrant chemokine
receptor signalling in T cells will need to be considered to prevent
unwanted side effects stemming from this axis. On the other
hand, the attraction of CAR T cells to distinct chemokine gradients
might promote the development of chemokine loss or down-
regulation as a novel escape mechanism and thereby alter cancer
biology, eventually rendering subsequent lines of immunother-
apeutic treatment less likely to impact on the patient’s condition.
Heterogeneity of chemokine expression will also need to be
clarified both within entities and patients, as some disease sites
with no or lower chemokine expression might remain inaccessible
to the modified T cells. Currently, novel strategies to induce
tumours to express a desired chemokine ligand through several
intratumoural delivery methods (further discussed below) are
being explored to circumvent this issue.
A recent approach to further enhance CAR T cell infiltration into
solid tumours exploits the process of T cell egress: for example, by
usingα4 integrin mutant (S988A), protein kinase A (PKA)-
mediated phosphorylation can be inhibited, stabilising theα4
(S988A)–paxillin interaction and resulting in an increase inα4
integrin signalling. The inhibition of PKA-mediatedα4 integrin
phosphorylation enhances integrinαLβ2 (LFA-1)-mediated migra-
tion, a phenomenon termed integrin transregulation.
69
Together,
increasedα4 andαLβ2 integrin signalling promotes T cell
extravasation from the vasculature and into the tissue, promoting
T cell adhesion to the vasculature of inflamed tissue in an ICAM-1-
and VCAM-1-dependent manner. In in vitro experiments, the
inhibition  ofα4  integrin  phosphorylation  promotedαLβ2-
mediated T cell migration, while in vivo, theα4 (S988A) mutant
mice showed a marked increase in T cell entry into ectopically
transplanted melanoma tumours and reduced the growth of
implanted B16 melanoma tumours.
70
CAR T cells have also been
engineered to target antigens such asα
v
β3 integrin, which are
2. Proliferation and survival
1. Trafficking
4. Control
5. Immunosuppressive microenvironment
CRISPR-Cas 9 target PD-1, CTLA-4 gene disruption
Switch receptors
Chimeric cytokine receptors
TRUCKs (IL-12, IL-18, IL-15)
Cells secretion of immune checkpoint inhibitors
(e.g., α-PD-1)
Drug-inducible self-destruct
Drug-inducible CAR expression
2-step activation program
FITC/Uni-CAR
iCAR
+
+
Chemokine receptors
aLβ2
avβ3
VEGFR2
3. Tumour recognition
Co-stimulatory domains
Chemokine receptors
IL-15
Next-generation CARs
CARs (e.g., MUC1TN)
Integrins (e.g., avβ6, β7)
Cancer testis antigens
Split CARs
Dual CAR T cells
T cell
Cancer cell
Stromal cell
Escape
CARDrug/compound
Fig. 2Strategies to address limitations to CAR T cell therapy in solid tumours. Overview of thefive major challenges facing adoptive T cell
therapy in treating solid tumours—trafficking, proliferation and survival, tumour cell recognition/discrimination, control of transfused T cells
and circumventing the immune-suppressive tumour microenvironment—and some approaches currently under investigation to improve
them. IL interleukin, VEGFR2 vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, Uni-CAR Universal CAR, iCAR inhibitory CAR, TRUCKs T cell
redirected for universal cytokine-mediated killing
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
29
selectively  enriched  in  the  tumour  microenvironment,
71
or
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor-2 (VEGFR2), a
highly expressed antigen enriched in the tumour vasculature.
72
Limited T cell infiltration into solid tumours will need to
be addressed in order to drive CAR T cells into tumours that
are not readily accessible or are hidden in dense extracellular
matrices.
Alternatively, a technologically less challenging and clinically
feasible strategy to overcome the issue of CAR T cell migration
and tumour infiltration is to employ local chemokine delivery or
production: several trials have investigated intracompartmental or
intratumoural delivery of adenovirus chemokine expressing virus
(CCL17)
73
or DNA plasmids encoding the desired chemokine
ligand (CCL5).
74–76
Although these approaches are clinically
feasible and do not influence the safety profile of CAR T cells,
the results obtained from the trials were modest. Local delivery
also comes with the major caveat that most patients are not
candidates for such a treatment due to the position and technical
difficulty of reaching the tumour site; furthermore, metastatic sites
will generally remain unaffected by this approach.
T CELL RECOGNITION AND TARGETING OF TUMOUR CELLS
The ability to transduce ex vivo T cells with antigen-specific TCRs
or CARs provides ACT with the powerful ability to selectively
target desired antigen(s). Theoretically, this ability to select and
target an antigen, or antigens, should provide the transfused
T cells with an elevated level of antigen discrimination and,
consequently, safety. At the same time, antigen recognition is the
prerequisite for any efficacy expected from T cell therapy.
However, several obstacles hinder proper targeting of antigen-
specific CAR T cells. First, for T cell-mediated therapy to be
effective, the targeted tumour antigen must be expressed on the
cell surface, but most known tumour specific antigens are
intracellular molecules or mutated versions of them.
77,78
Second,
the targeted antigen needs to be ideally expressed only on
tumour cells—for example, truncated or mutated proteins. This is
in contrast to tumour-associated antigens (TAA), which have an
enriched expression in tumour cells but are also expressed in
healthy tissues.
79,80
A separate category comprises antigens
expressed only in embryonic or otherwise immune privileged
tissues,  such  as  cancer  testis  antigens.
81
A  comprehensive
overview of antigens currently targeted by CAR T cells has been
recently published.
16
In the absence of antigens that are truly tumour-specific, most T
cell therapies in clinical trials are facing toxicity issues due to‘on
target off tumour’recognition of the targeted antigen on normal
cells.
18
Several approaches are under investigation to mitigate the
effects of on target off tumour recognition (discussed below). On
the other hand, the major reason for treatment failure of the most
advanced CAR T cells targeting CD19 is loss of antigen expression
or selection by B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells for
mutants or variants that cannot be recognised by the anti-CD19
CAR T cells.
82
Accordingly, highly specific antigen targeting by CAR
T cells is accompanied by an inherent dilemma that applies
selective pressure for the development of variants which are
responsible for the relapse. Significant work has focused on
reducing on target off tumour cross reaction by identifying more
specific cancer antigens, such asαvβ6 or MUC1TN, which are
highly expressed on several cancer subtypes (colon, lung, breast,
cervix, pancreas and others) and can arise from post-translational
cancer-specific modifications such as glycol modifications.
83,84
In
other cases, novel epitopes are exposed upon conformational
changes induced by integrin activation, as seen for integrinβ7,
which is a candidate for targeting in multiple myeloma
85
(Fig.2).
Currently, both on target off tumour and off target cross reaction
are very difficult to predict in vitro and in silico, as shown by
several examples in which preclinical models did not adequately
predict effects or side effects.
86,87
Along these lines, novel CARs
need to be carefully assessed and clinicians need to favour a
minimal anticipated biological effect level (MABEL) approach over
the no observed adverse effect levels (NOAEL) for T cell dosing.
This is of particular importance as the absence of evidence of
toxicity does not equate to evidence of absence.
With the lack of bonafide cancer-specific antigens, efficacy and
safety might be further enhanced by simultaneously targeting two
or more different cancer-associated antigens. The advantage of
this approach is that fullyfledged T cell activation would only
occur when both antigens are present, which should ideally be a
very rare event outside of a tumour. With this in mind, two
avenues of investigation are being pursued. Thefirst combines the
expression of two identical—except for the targeted antigen—
CARs (referred to as dual CARs),
88
enabling an enhancement of
efficacy when both antigens are engaged (Fig.3a). The second
involves separation of the co-stimulatory domains (e.g. CD28 and
41BB) from CD3ζon two different CARs (referred to as split
CARs),
89
requiring the simultaneous engagement of both CARs to
complete T cell activation (Fig.3b). Both approaches have
demonstrated strong efficacy in preclinical models.
90–92
Their
clinical relevance is currently being investigated in clinical trials
(including    NCT03289455,    NCT03125577,    NCT03258047,
NCT03198052). Additional strategies to enhance antigen discrimi-
nation and to reduce on target off tumour killing have also been
engineered  and  are  further  explored  in  the  section  on
programmed T cell control below.
T CELL PROLIFERATION AND SURVIVAL
A major predictor of the efficacy of CAR T cell therapy is the extent
of T cell expansion and persistence in a given patient.
93
Expansion
and persistence need to occur in order for T cells to reach a
sufficient number to effectively eliminate the target tumour cells.
Fundamental immunology indicates that T cells require three
synergistic  signals  to  drive  proliferation  and  survival:  TCR
engagement, co-stimulatory signalling and cytokine signalling.
94
The solid tumour microenvironment, however, despite containing
plenty of antigens, lacks activating molecules and instead exposes
effector cells to an abundance of suppressive molecules. This
environment drives T cell anergy and dysfunction.
94
A strategy to
promote CAR T cell function involves the addition of co-
stimulatory signalling moieties such as CD28 or 41BB to the CAR
itself to promote T cell expansion and survival in these non-
permissive environments.
18
Mechanistically, however, the addition
of one or more co-stimulatory domains might not be sufficient
when promitotic signals are rare, prompting additional investiga-
tions into alternative mechanisms which can further enhance T
cell proliferation and maintenance. One strategy is to fortify the
T cells with cytokine signalling in such a T cell hostile environment
(Fig.2). Such an approach using repetitive dosing with biologically
active IL-15 in mice enhanced antigen-specific CAR T cell
recruitment, infiltration, proliferation and cytotoxic capabilities.
95
This concept of‘fortification’is further realised infifth-generation
CARs, which include a truncated IL-2 receptorβchain and a
STAT3-binding moiety. Activation of this kind of CAR can drive
comprehensive TCR signalling complete with co-stimulatory and
cytokine-driven JAK–STAT signalling to enhance proliferation and
survival of the bioengineered T cells.
29
These approaches to
promote T cell proliferation and survival are still in the early stages
of investigation and their potential contribution to future clinical
settings is uncertain.
PROGRAMMED T CELL CONTROL MECHANISMS
As highlighted above, compromised safety and CAR-related side
effects are major hurdles to CAR T cell application.
18,86,87
Once
transfused into patients, CAR T cells are biologically active and
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
30
difficult to control. With several CAR-associated deaths in clinical
trials, there is a critical need to enhance and control CAR safety. In
principle, safety could be enhanced in three ways: conditional and
controllable activation of CAR T cells through switch compounds,
such as a modified version of rapamycin (referred to as‘rapalog’)
96
(Fig.4a); depletion of CAR T cells upon the occurrence of
undesired and uncontrolled side effects; and suppression of CAR
activity in the vicinity of non-tumour cells through receptors that
recognise the latter. The most advanced modalities are strategies
to deplete T cells upon the occurrence of side effects, using a
suicide gene or agents to deplete cells bearing specific markers
through monoclonal antibodies. An example of the latter is CAR
T cells that express a truncated human EGFR polypeptide
(huEGFRt), which is devoid of the extracellular N-terminal ligand-
binding domains and intracellular receptor tyrosine kinase domain
but can be targeted by cetuximab. Infusion of cetuximab, which is
an IgG1 antibody, will bind to the truncated EGFR expressed on
the transfused T cells and be eliminated by other immune cells
through the recognition of the constant domain of cetuximab in a
fragment  crystallisable  (Fc)  receptor-dependent  manner.
97,98
Other examples include ganciclovir-mediated targeting of T cells
transduced with the herpes simplex tyrosine kinase
99
or a
chemical inducer of dimerisation to deplete T cells transduced
with an inducible caspase 9.
100
Although in the context of
allogeneic stem cell transplantation, some evidence suggests T
cell depletion to be sufficient to reverse graft-versus-host-disease,
such a relationship has not yet been proven for CAR T cell side
effects.
97
It remains to be seen whether depletion of CAR T cells
upon the occurrence of severe toxicities could revert or prevent
lethal or long-lasting tissue damage. An important side effect of
such an approach, however, is the removal of the biologically
active CAR T cells, which could in effect promote cancer
recurrences.
Another attractive option is to render CAR T cell function
dependent on the provision of additional substances such as
antibodies or derivatives thereof. Along these lines, CARs targeting
Dual CAR T cell
Targeting two antigens
a
b
Tumour cell
SynNotch
receptor
Tumour cell
Antigen
CAR
T cellT cell
Split CAR T cell
Tumour cell
T cellT cell
Tumour cell
Activation
Activation
No activation
Activation
Relative T cell
activation
Relative T cell
activation
CD3ζ domain
Co-stimulatory
domain
Fig. 3Schematic representation of selected strategies to enhance CAR T cells recognition and activation. Recent strategies to enhance the
activation of CAR T cells include the use of dual CARs, targeting two surface antigens (a) and split CARs (b). Legend indicated in thefigure
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
31
Drug-inducible CAR
a
b
c
Tumour cellTumour cell
Antigen
Antigen
Transcription
factor
Transcription
factor
Drug
T cell
Drug
T cell
CAR
CAR
No activation
No activation
CD16/Uni-CAR/FITC CAR
CD16/Uni-CAR/
α-FITC CAR
CD16/Uni-CAR/
α-FITC CAR
Tumour cell
Tumour cell
T cell
Activation
iCAR
T cell
Inhibitory domain
of iCAR
Tumour cell
CAR
T cell
iCAR T cell
T cell
Tumour cell
Immunoglobulin/
Immunoglobulin-FITC/
Immunoglobulin-targeting tag
Activation
Activation
Activation
or
iCAR
Fig. 4Schematic representation of selected strategies to inhibit CAR T cell activation and prevent off tumour on target activity. Strategies to
enhance CAR T cell safety include:adrug-inducible CAR T cells,bCAR T cells that require antigen-specific antibodies (CD16/FITC or Uni-CAR
T cells) andcinhibitory CARs (iCARs), which moderate or inhibit T cell activation when antigens expressed on bystander cells are encountered.
Legend indicated in thefigure
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
32
the Fc part of antibodies (e.g. anti-CD16-CAR),
101
or targeting tags
appended to antibodies (Uni-CAR)
102
or derivatives such as FITC
(anti-FITC CAR),
103
have been developed (Fig.4b). A similar
strategy is the use of bispecific antibodies that specifically recruit
CAR  T  cells  by  targeting  a  co-transduced  marker  antigen
decorating the CAR T cell for enhanced CAR activity.
104
These
approaches allow precise control of CAR T cell reactivity based on
the antibodies’half-life, thus lowering the risk of side effects while
preserving efficacy. Another advantage of aforementioned thera-
pies is the possibility of using a single cellular product, irrespective
of the TAA to be targeted, in combination with an approved
monoclonal antibody.
Lastly, CAR T cells can utilise a NOT-gate circuits system to
enhance efficacy and reduce off target targeting (Fig.4c). A NOT-
gate circuit is a CAR T cell that expresses (either inducibly or
constitutively) two or more different CARs. Thefirst CAR would
target a tumour-specific antigen and contain the mandatory
stimulatory (CD3ζ) and co-stimulatory (e.g. CD28 or CD137)
domains, while the second CAR would be specific to an antigen
which is typically expressed on normal healthy tissue or bystander
cells and linked to inhibitory (iCAR) signalling domains (e.g. PD-1
and CTLA-4). The simultaneous engagement of both the CAR and
the iCAR within the same immune synapse would prevent or
dampen the activation of the T cell, and result in poor activation or
T cell anergy,
42
thus enhancing discrimination between tumour
cells and healthy cells. These novel strategies to improve the
specificity and control of CAR T cells could potentially increase the
discrimination of normal versus tumoural cells, but additional
investigation into the clinical significance is needed.
COUNTERACTING THE IMMUNOSUPPRESSIVE
MICROENVIRONMENT
Solid tumours  are  typically  composed  of a  heterogeneous
population of cells in a microenvironment which is hypoxic,
poorly vascularised, has an elevated interstitial pressure and is
often surrounded by a dense extracellular matrix.
51
These physical
and metabolic barriers prevent immune cell recruitment, activa-
tion and persistence, while simultaneously promoting the recruit-
ment of immune suppressor cells.
49,51
This enables tumour cells to
escape immune detection and destruction and to dampen CAR T
cell activity.
105
Accordingly, immune suppression needs to be
overcome for optimal CAR T cell action. In principle, three main
avenues have been explored to enable CAR T cell activity in spite
of immune suppression: deletion of selected immune-suppressive
factors in the therapeutic T cells; introduction of molecules able to
circumvent T cell suppression in CAR T cells; and combination
therapies providing exogenous immune suppression reversion
(Fig.2).
Novel  approaches  to  circumvent  tumour-driven  immune
suppression have been explored by using the clustered regularly
interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)–CRISPR-associated
9 (Cas9) system. CRISPR–Cas9 technology has been used to
enhance CAR T cell function by knocking out genes encoding T
cell inhibitory receptors or signalling molecules such as PD-1 or
CTLA-4.
106–108
PD-1-deficient CD19 CAR T cells show improved
killing of a CD19-positive and programmed cell death ligand 1
(PD-L1)-positive cell lines in vitro and enhanced clearance of
tumour  xenografts  in  vivo.
106
Similarly,  disruption  of  PD-1
enhanced in vivo anti-tumour activity in a model of prostate
cancer using CAR T cells specific for prostate stem cell antigen
(PSCA).
108
Interestingly, the feasibility of generating PD-1 and
CTLA-4 dual inhibitory pathway-resistant PSCA-specific CAR T cells
has been demonstrated.
107
However, the deletion of inhibitory
molecules can be a double-edged sword, as the removal of some
suppressive pathways may lead to uncontrolled proliferation or to
an increased risk of autoimmunity. Immune checkpoints are
molecules normally involved in the maintenance of peripheral
tolerance to self-molecules by preventing over-reactivity of self-
antigen-specific T cells. Deletion of such important molecules
might induce, aside from overactivation, off-target activation of
T cells, as observed previously in studies with systemic PD-1
antibody blockade.
109
Although the use of CRISPR-Cas9 technol-
ogy to knock out genes in CAR T cells is still in preclinical studies, a
clinical trial that will evaluate the effect of PD-1 knockout by this
technology in NY-ESO-1-specific TCR-transduced T cells has
recently been approved (NCT03399448).
110
An alternative approach to prolong the responsiveness of CAR-
modified T cells is to equip them with activating chimeric switch
receptors (CSRs), also referred to as immunomodulatory fusion
proteins. Activating CSRs combine the extracellular ligand-binding
domain of an inhibitory receptor (PD-1 or CTLA-4) fused through a
transmembrane domain with the cytoplasmic co-stimulatory
signalling  domain  of  CD28.
111–115
The  engagement  of  the
extracellular portion of this fusion receptor transmits an activating
signal instead of the normal physiological inhibitory signal. T cells
transduced with PD-1–CD28 CSR have been shown to have
increased extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphoryla-
tion and granzyme B expression, increased proliferation and
cytokine secretion—indicative of T cell co-stimulation—upon PD-
L1 binding.
112
The potent anti-tumour activity of CTLA-4–CD28
CSR T cells has been further validated in a murine model of
melanoma.
113
Two phase I clinical trials have already been
initiated to determine the safety and efficacy of autologous PD-
1–CD28 CSR-modified T cells in the treatment of PD-L1-positive,
recurrent and metastatic malignant tumours (NCT02930967) and
recurrent glioblastoma (NCT02937844). In line with the encoura-
ging results from studies combining TCR-modified T cells and
CSR,
111,113,114
PD-1–CD28 can improve the therapeutic effects of
anti-mesothelin CARs and anti-PSCA CARs in tumour xenograft
models.
115
The improved therapeutic effect was attributed to an
increase in the number of infiltrating CAR T cells, a decrease in
susceptibility of the cells to tumour-induced hypofunction, and an
attenuation of inhibitory receptor expression. Together, these
results provide a foundation for further clinical studies using CAR-
T cell therapy in combination with a CSR strategy.
A further embodiment of CSRs is provided by chimeric cytokine
receptors, which can transform secreted immunosuppressive
signals into immune-activating signals. This notion has been
demonstrated for the chimeric cytokine receptor IL-4R–IL-7R,
which comprises the anti-inflammatory IL-4 receptor (IL-4R)
exodomain fused to the pro-inflammatory IL-7 receptor (IL-7R)
endodomain.
116
Upon receptor engagement by tumour-derived
IL-4,  immunosuppressive  effects  were  abrogated,  increasing
proliferation and activation of tumour-directed cytotoxic T cells
and enhancing the anti-tumour activity in vivo. Optimal activation
of tumour-antigen-specific T cells overexpressing IL-4R–IL-7R CSRs
occurred only when engineered T cells encountered their specific
tumour antigen and elevated IL-4 was present in the tumour
microenvironment. In such a system, IL-4 would mimic beneficial
IL-7 signalling through the CSR. Most cytokine signals mainly act in
conjunction with TCR or related signalling, which is provided in
this system by the CAR. Along these lines, full activation will only
be seen in the presence of both IL-4 and the CAR target.
117
These
results encourage further adaptation of CSRs as a supplementary
method tofine-tune CAR T cell therapies. It remains unclear
whether targeting one of such inhibitory pathways would be
sufficient to achieve therapeutic efficacy in a clinical setting.
Another approach involves the use of truncated suppressive
receptors such as a dominant-negative form of TGF-βreceptor II or
a dominant-negative PD-1, which shield T cells from the negative
effects of TGF-βand PD-L1, respectively.
118–120
Apart from the
upregulation of inhibitory ligands such as PD-L1, the tumour
microenvironment is additionally enriched with immunosuppres-
sive cytokines, one of which is TGF-β. TGF-βis produced in excess
by tumour cells themselves, as well as cells of the tumour
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
33
stroma.
121
TGF-βhas been shown to impair both innate and
adaptive cellular immunity, generating a favourable microenvir-
onment for tumour growth and metastasis, and is deemed an
essential component of the tumour’s anti-immune defences.
122,123
Following this line of thought, strategies that combine CAR T cell
therapy with blocking immune-suppressive axes such as PD-1–PD-
L1 or providing important cytokines depleted in the tumour
environment, have been investigated. Combining PD-1-blocking
antibodies with CAR T cell therapy has dramatically enhanced CAR
T cell function in different preclinical models and prompted the
initiation of clinical trials in different indications.
124,125
Cytokine
support, the third signal required for T cell activation, can also be a
means of breaking through T cell suppression: provision of IL-2 or
IL-15 has yielded significant improvements in different mod-
els,
126,127
although a major caveat is the side effects of exogenous
cytokine application. It remains to be seen if these deleterious
effects might be outweighed by the clinical benefits of CAR T cell
therapy.
CAR T CELLS AS FACTORIES
A more complex strategy for overcoming tumour-driven immune
suppression involves the use of CAR T cells that are capable of
transforming the immunosuppressive microenvironment into an
immune-permissive one. This strategy involves the use of the
fourth generation of CARs, or TRUCKs, which are CAR T cells
engineered  to  constitutively  or  inducibly  express  pro-
inflammatory cytokines. One such candidate is IL-12, which
strongly enhances the response of innate and adoptive immune
cells to cancer cells.
128
IL-12 increases interferon (IFN)-γsecretion
and the expression of granzyme B and perforin by T cells
129
and
NK cells,
130
and suppresses tumour-induced T-regulatory (T-reg)
cell proliferation.
131
As a consequence, these mechanisms may
enhance additional tumour clearance by bystander NK cells and
conventional T cells, and counteract the ability of T-reg cells to
promote tumour growth. These effects will naturally synergise
with CAR T cells for enhanced anti-tumoural activity. For this
reason, the combination of CAR T cell therapy with constitutive or
inducible IL-12 expression has been extensively explored for the
treatment of several malignancies in preclinical models.
132–134
IL-
12-expressing TRUCKs exhibited a remarkable efficacy against
solid tumours in preclinical models, with no observable signs of
toxicity, as compared to clinical trials studying the use of
recombinant human IL-12 as a therapy.
135
Furthermore, a clinically
relevant advantage of IL-12-producing TRUCKs is the elimination
of established cancer without the requirement for cyclopho-
sphamide preconditioning.
132
Thefirst dose-escalation trials of
autologous TILs transduced with a gene encoding IL-12 driven by
a T cell nuclear factor showed anti-tumour activity in melanoma,
but also displayed dose-limiting severe toxicities including liver
dysfunction, high fevers, and sporadic life-threatening haemody-
namic instability.
136
A phase I clinical trial of CAR T cells targeting
the Mucin 1 antigen and co-expressing IL-12 provided only little
therapeutic benefit, although no adverse side effects were
reported.
137
More clinical trials examining the safety and efficacy
of IL-12-armoured CAR T cells are currently ongoing.
138
A safer alternative to TRUCK IL-12 T cells might be CAR T cells
secreting IL-18. IL-18 is a cytokine characterised as an inducer of
IFN-γexpression in T cells
139
and has been shown to activate
monocytes and lymphocytes without causing severe toxicity in
clinical trials.
140
Recently, two studies revealed that inducible
expression of IL-18 in CAR T cells enhances proliferation and anti-
tumour activity of monocytes and lymphocytes.
141,142
Interest-
ingly, IL-18-producing TRUCK T cells induced acute inflammatory
reactions and altered the balance of pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cells in established, large pancreatic and lung
tumours. Specifically, IL-18 polarises CAR T cells towards an
effector phenotype paired with an acute inflammatory response.
IL-18 CAR T cell treatment was accompanied by an increase in the
number of M1 macrophages and NK cells, whereas a decrease in
M2 macrophages, T regs and suppressive dendritic cells was
observed. These effects go beyond the CAR T cell-only effects, and
synergise with their activity.
142
Another cytokine that has been overexpressed in CAR T cells is
IL-15. IL-15 is a regulator of T cell homoeostasis, prolonging T cell
survival. Additionally, it increases the lytic capacity of T cells by
stimulating granzyme B expression.
143
Anti-CD19 CAR T cells
engineered to secrete IL-15 showed improved antigen-driven
expansion, reduced PD-1 expression and cell death, and improved
anti-leukaemic efficacy.
144
In another approach, anti-CD19 CAR
T cells have been designed to secrete a soluble form of herpes
virus entry mediator (HVEM,TNFRSF14).
145
TheHVEMgene is
frequently mutated in germinal centre (GC) lymphomas.
146
The
loss of inhibitory cell–cell interactions betweenHVEMand B and T
Lymphocyte Attenuator (BTLA) leads to autonomous activation
of  B-cell  proliferation  and  drives  the  development  of  GC
lymphomas in vivo.
145
HVEM-deficient lymphoma B cells also
induce  a  tumour-supportive  microenvironment.  Accordingly,
HVEMprotein secreted by modified CAR T cells binds BTLA and
restores tumour suppression.
Another strategy that exploits CAR T cells as local delivery
agents or‘micro-pharmacies’is combinatorial immunotherapy, in
which engineered CAR T cells secrete immune checkpoint
inhibitors. For example, CAR T cells engineered to secrete human
anti-PD-L1 antibodies to block T cell exhaustion have been shown
to clear renal cell carcinoma in a humanised mouse model.
147
Anti-PD-L1 antibody delivery to the tumour site led to afive-fold
reduction in tumour growth and a 50–80% reduction in tumour
weight in comparison to treatment with parental CAR T cells.
Moreover, expression of PD-L1 and the cell proliferation marker
Ki67 in the tumours decreased and levels of secreted granzyme B
by modified CAR T cells increased. Anti-CD19 CAR T cells
engineered to secrete anti-PD1 antibody enhanced anti-tumour
activity and prolonged overall survival in a xenograft mouse
model.
148
Interestingly, a comparison of combinatorial therapy
using CAR T cells engineered to secrete anti-PD1 antibodies versus
CAR T cell therapy administered in conjunction with anti-PD1
antibodies revealed that systemically injected anti-PD-1 antibody
had little effect on CD8+T cell function.
148
This result suggests
that, given the low concentration of secreted anti-PD-1 in
comparison to systemic injection (15-fold lower than the amount
detected in the group in which antibodies were systemically
injected,
148
) the anti-PD-1 antibody secreted by CAR T cells might
provide a safer and more potent approach to enhancing the
functional capacity of CAR T cells.
Taken together, the delivery of different payloads to the tumour
through CAR T cells has shown promise in preclinical studies.
Several clinical trials have been initiated to test the safety and
efficacy of CAR T cells that, in addition to targeting a specific
tumour antigen, secrete either anti-PD-1 alone or anti-PD-1 in
combination  with  anti-CTLA-4  or  anti-PD-L1  antibodies
(NCT03179007,  NCT03182816,  NCT03182803,  NCT03030001,
NCT02873390, NCT02862028, NCT03170141). Further develop-
ment of these combination therapies may become possible by
new strategies to engineer T cells.
CONCLUSIONS
CAR T cells designed to express CD19 have shown unprecedented
clinical success in otherwise refractory patients suffering from ALL
or diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, frequently accompanied by
severe adverse toxicity. These results exemplify the power of the
approach and have revolutionised the concept of future blood-
borne cancer treatments. By contrast, little or no clinical efficacy
has so far been reported using CAR T cells for solid malignancies.
Based on published clinical and preclinical trials with CAR-
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
34
modified T cells, we have identifiedfive important limitations to
CAR therapy that need to be overcome for optimal treatment
efficacy and safety: T cell recruitment, activation and proliferation,
tumour cell targeting, control mechanisms, and circumventing the
immune-suppressive microenvironment. These limitations will all
have to be tackled in some way in order to increase T cell efficacy
in solid tumours and to broaden the applicability of the strategy.
An important approach will be the combination of several layers
of engineering in one cellular product to address these limitations.
This is an as yet unresolved issue, as most of the advances so far
have been made in the area of tumour targeting, or on
individually addressing these limitations as separate entities.
Ongoing and future trials will reveal if the promise of cellular
and, more specifically, CAR T cell therapy will benefit a broader
population of tumour patients than those suffering from rare
refractory haematological malignancies.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was supported by grants from the international doctoral programme“i-
Target: Immunotargeting of cancer”funded by the Elite Network of Bavaria (to S.K.
and S.E.), the Melanoma Research Alliance (grant number 409510 to S.K.), the Marie-
Sklodowska-Curie“Training Network for the Immunotherapy of Cancer (IMMUTRAIN)”
funded by the H2020 programme of the European Union (to S.E. and S.K.), the Else
Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (to S.K.), the German Cancer Aid (to S.K.), the Ernst-Jung-
Stiftung (to S.K.), the LMU Munich’s Institutional Strategy LMUexcellent within the
framework of the German Excellence Initiative (to S.E. and S.K.), the Bundesminister-
ium für Bildung und Forschung VIP+grant ONKATTRACT (to S.E. and S.K.) and the
European Research Council Starting Grant (grant number 756017 to S.K.).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed to the preparation, writing and proof reading of the
manuscript.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Competing interests:The authors declare no competing interests.
Note:This work is published under the standard license to publish agreement. After
12 months the work will become freely available and the license terms will switch to
a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
REFERENCES
1. Kobold, S. et al. Immunotherapy in tumors: activated T cells as a new treatment
modality.Dtsch. Ärzteblatt Int.112, 809–815 (2015).
2. Decker, W. K. et al. Cancer immunotherapy: historical perspective of a clinical
revolution and emerging preclinical animal models.Front. Immunol.8, 829 (2017).
3. Larkin, J. et al. Combined Nivolumab and Ipilimumab or monotherapy in pre-
viously untreated melanoma.N. Engl. J. Med.373,23–34 (2015).
4. Motzer, R. J. et al. Nivolumab versus Everolimus in advanced renal cell carci-
noma.N. Engl. J. Med.373, 1803–1813 (2015).
5. Martínez-Lostao, L., Anel, A. & Pardo, J. How do cytotoxic lymphocytes kill cancer
cells?Clin. Cancer Res.21, 5047–5056 (2015).
6. Rosenberg, S. A. et al. Use of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and interleukin-2 in
the immunotherapy of patients with metastatic melanoma.N. Engl. J. Med.319,
1676–1680 (1988).
7. Morgan, R. A. et al. Cancer regression in patients after transfer of genetically
engineered lymphocytes.Science314, 126–129 (2006).
8. Kalos, M. & June, C. H. Adoptive T cell transfer for cancer immunotherapy in the
era of synthetic biology.Immunity39,49–60 (2013).
9. Buechner, J. et al. Global registration trial of efficacy and safety of CTL019 in
pediatric and young adult patients with relapsed/refractory (R/R) acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia (ALL): update to the interim analysis.Clin. Lymphoma,
Myeloma Leuk.17, S263-S4 (2017).
10. Locke, F. L. et al. Clinical and biologic covariates of outcomes in ZUMA-1: a
pivotal trial of axicabtagene ciloleucel (axi-cel; KTE-C19) in patients with
refractory aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma (r-NHL).J. Clin. Oncol.35
(15_suppl), 7512 (2017).
11. Maude, S. L. et al. Tisagenlecleucel in children and young adults with B-cell
lymphoblastic leukemia.N. Engl. J. Med.378, 439–448 (2018).
12. Neelapu, S. S. et al. Axicabtagene Ciloleucel CAR T cell therapy in refractory large
B-cell lymphoma.N. Engl. J. Med.377, 2531–2544 (2017).
13. Brudno, J. N. & Kochenderfer, J. N. Chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapies for
lymphoma.Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol.15, 31 (2017).
14. Cohen, A. D. et al. B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA)-specific chimeric antigen
receptor T cells (CART-BCMA) for multiple myeloma (MM): initial safety and
efficacy from a phase I study.Blood128, 1147 (2016).
15. Chizuka, A. et al. Difference between hematological malignancy and solid tumor
research articles published in four major medical journals.Leukemia
20, 1655
(2006).
16. D’Aloia, M. M., Zizzari, I. G., Sacchetti, B., Pierelli, L. & Alimandi, M. CAR-T cells: the
long and winding road to solid tumors.Cell Death Dis.9, 282 (2018).
17. O’Rourke, D. M. et al. A single dose of peripherally infused EGFRvIII-directed CAR
T cells mediates antigen loss and induces adaptive resistance in patients with
recurrent glioblastoma. Sci. Transl. Med.9, eaaa0984 (2017).
18. Lim, W. A. & June, C. H. The principles of engineering immune cells to treat
cancer.Cell168, 724–740 (2017).
19. Garrido, F., Aptsiauri, N., Doorduijn, E. M., Garcia Lora, A. M. & van Hall, T. The
urgent need to recover MHC class I in cancers for effective immunotherapy.
Curr. Opin. Immunol.39,44–51 (2016).
20. Zhang, C., Liu, J., Zhong, J. F. & Zhang, X. Engineering CAR-T cells.Biomark. Res.
5, 22 (2017).
21. Luiz Ricardo, G., Paula Souza, S., Ana Paula, C., Barbara Brasil, S. & Antonio,
CVaTGA. Unraveling antibody display: systems biology and personalized med-
icine.Curr. Pharm. Des.22, 6560–6576 (2016).
22. Ramos, C. A. & Dotti, G. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-engineered lympho-
cytes for cancer therapy.Expert Opin. Biol. Ther.11, 855–873 (2011).
23. Cantrell, D. A. T cell antigen receptor signal transduction.Immunology105,
369–374 (2002).
24. Su, X. & Vale, R. Mechanisms of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) signaling during
T cell activation.Biophys. J.114, 107a-8a (2018).
25. Smith, A. J., Oertle, J., Warren, D. & Prato, D. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)
T cell therapy for malignant cancers: summary and perspective.J. Cell.
Immunother.2,59–68 (2016).
26. Acuto, O. & Michel, F. CD28-mediated co-stimulation: a quantitative support for
TCR signalling.Nat. Rev. Immunol.3, 939 (2003).
27. Hombach, A. et al. Tumor-specific T cell activation by recombinant immunor-
eceptors: CD3ζsignaling and CD28 costimulation are simultaneously required
for efficient IL-2 secretion and can be integrated into one combined CD28/CD3ζ
signaling receptor molecule.J. Immunol.167, 6123 (2001).
28. Finney, H. M., Lawson, A. D. G., Bebbington, C. R. & Weir, A. N. C. Chimeric
receptors providing both primary and costimulatory signaling in T cells from a
single gene product.J. Immunol.161, 2791 (1998).
29. Kagoya, Y. et al. A novel chimeric antigen receptor containing a JAK–STAT
signaling domain mediates superior antitumor effects.Nat. Med.24, 352 (2018).
30. Turtle, C. J. et al. CD19 CAR
–T cells of defined CD4(+):CD8(+) composition in
adult B cell ALL patients.J. Clin. Invest.126, 2123–2138 (2016).
31. Kakarla, S. & Gottschalk, S. CAR T cells for solid tumors: armed and ready to go?
Cancer J. (Sudbury, Mass).20, 151–155 (2014).
32. Park, J. R. et al. Adoptive transfer of chimeric antigen receptor re-directed
cytolytic T lymphocyte clones in patients with neuroblastoma.Mol. Ther.15,
825–833 (2007).
33. Lamers, C. H. J. et al. Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with CAIX
CAR-engineered T cells: clinical evaluation and management of on-target toxi-
city.Mol. Ther.21, 904–912 (2013).
34. Lamers, C. H. J. et al. Treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma with auto-
logous T-lymphocytes genetically retargeted against carbonic anhydrase IX:first
clinical experience.J. Clin. Oncol.24, e20–e2 (2006).
35. Morgan, R. A. et al. Cancer regression and neurologic toxicity following anti-
MAGE-A3 TCR gene therapy.J. Immunother.36, 133–151 (2013).
36. Robbins, P. F. et al. A pilot trial using lymphocytes genetically engineered with
an NY-ESO-1-reactive T cell receptor: long term follow up and correlates with
response.Clin. Cancer Res.21, 1019–1027 (2015).
37. Barnes, T. A. & Amir, E. HYPE or HOPE: the prognostic value of infiltrating
immune cells in cancer.Br. J. Cancer117, 451 (2017).
38. Gooden, M. J. M., de Bock, G. H., Leffers, N., Daemen, T. & Nijman, H. W. The
prognostic influence of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes in cancer: a systematic
review with meta-analysis.Br. J. Cancer105, 93 (2011).
39. Haanen, J. B. A. G. Converting cold into hot tumors by combining immu-
notherapies.Cell170, 1055–1056 (2017).
40. van der Woude, L. L., Gorris, M. A. J., Halilovic, A., Figdor, C. G. & de Vries, I. J. M.
Migrating into the tumor: a roadmap for T cells.Trends Cancer3, 797–808
(2017).
41. Turan, T. et al. Immune oncology, immune responsiveness and the theory of
everything.J. Immunother. Cancer6, 50 (2018).
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
35
42. Hsueh EC, Morton DL. Antigen-based immunotherapy of melanoma: Canvaxin
therapeutic polyvalent cancer vaccine. Seminars in Cancer Biology.13, 401–7
(2003).
43. Small, E. J. et al. Granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor—secreting
allogeneic cellular immunotherapy for hormone-refractory prostate cancer.Clin.
Cancer Res.13, 3883 (2007).
44. Gilboa, E. A quantum leap in cancer vaccines?J. Immunother. Cancer4,87
(2016).
45. Walter, S. et al. Multipeptide immune response to cancer vaccine IMA901 after
single-dose cyclophosphamide associates with longer patient survival.Nat. Med.
18, 1254 (2012).
46. Sondak, V. K., Sabel, M. S. & Mulé, J. J. Allogeneic and autologous melanoma
vaccines: where have we been and where are we going?Clin. Cancer Res.12,
2337s (2006).
47. Drake, C. G. & Antonarakis, E. S. Current status of immunological approaches for
the treatment of prostate cancer.Curr. Opin. Urol.20, 241–246 (2010).
48. Brahmer, J. et al. Nivolumab versus Docetaxel in advanced squamous-cell non-
small-cell lung cancer.N. Engl. J. Med.373, 123–135 (2015).
49. Wu, A. A., Drake, V., Huang, H.-S., Chiu, S. & Zheng, L. Reprogramming the tumor
microenvironment: tumor-induced immunosuppressive factors paralyze T cells.
Oncoimmunology4, e1016700 (2015).
50. Chow, M. T. & Luster, A. D. Chemokines in cancer.Cancer Immunol. Res.2,
1125–1131 (2014).
51. Hanahan, D. & Weinberg, R. A. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation.Cell
144, 646–74 (2011).
52. Brown, C. E. et al. Tumor-derived chemokine MCP-1/CCL2 is sufficient for
mediating tumor tropism of adoptively transferred T cells.J. Immunol.179, 3332
(2007).
53. Craddock, J. A. et al. Enhanced tumor trafficking of GD2 chimeric antigen
receptor T cells by expression of the chemokine receptor CCR2b.J. Immunother.
(1991)33, 780–788 (2010).
54. Moon, E. K. et al. Expression of a functional CCR2 receptor enhances tumor
localization and tumor eradication by retargeted human T cells expressing a
mesothelin-specific chimeric antibody receptor.Clin. Cancer Res.17, 4719–4730
(2011).
55. Rapp, M. et al. C-C chemokine receptor type-4 transduction of T cells enhances
interaction with dendritic cells, tumor infiltration and therapeutic efficacy of
adoptive T cell transfer.Oncoimmunology5, e1105428 (2016).
56. Di Stasi, A. et al. T lymphocytes coexpressing CCR4 and a chimeric antigen
receptor targeting CD30 have improved homing and antitumor activity in a
Hodgkin tumor model.Blood113, 6392–6402 (2009).
57. Carlsten, M. et al. Efficient mRNA-based genetic engineering of human NK cells
with high-affinity CD16 and CCR7 augments rituximab-induced ADCC against
lymphoma and targets NK cell migration toward the lymph node-sssociated
chemokine CCL19.Front. Immunol.7, 105 (2016).
58. Kershaw, M. H. et al. Redirecting migration of T cells to chemokine secreted from
tumors by genetic modification with CXCR2.Hum. Gene Ther.13, 1971–1980
(2002).
59. Hillerdal, V. & Essand, M. Chimeric antigen receptor-engineered T cells for the
treatment of metastatic prostate cancer.BioDrugs29,75–89 (2015).
60. Vignali, D. & Kallikourdis, M. Improving homing in T cell therapy.Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev.36, 107–116 (2017).
61. Peng, W. et al. PD-1 blockade enhances T cell migration to tumors by elevating
IFN-γinducible chemokines.Cancer Res.72, 5209–5218 (2012).
62. Hong, M. et al. Chemotherapy induces intratumoral expression of chemokines in
cutaneous melanoma, favoring T cell infiltration and tumor control.Cancer Res.
71, 6997 (2011).
63. Van Overmeire, E., Laoui, D., Keirsse, J., Van Ginderachter, J. A. & Sarukhan, A.
Mechanisms driving macrophage diversity and specialization in distinct tumor
microenvironments and parallelisms with other tissues.Front. Immunol.5, 127
(2014).
64. Hillyer, P., Mordelet, E., Flynn, G. & Male, D. Chemokines, chemokine receptors
and adhesion molecules on different human endothelia: discriminating the
tissue-specific functions that affect leucocyte migration.Clin. Exp. Immunol.134,
431–441 (2003).
65. Huang, Y. et al. CD4+and CD8+T cells have opposing roles in breast cancer
progression and outcome.Oncotarget6, 17462–78 (2015).
66. Hoyer, K. K., Kuswanto, W. F., Gallo, E. & Abbas, A. K. Distinct roles of helper T cell
subsets in a systemic autoimmune disease.Blood113, 389–395 (2009).
67. Rani, M. & Schwacha, M. G. The composition of T cell subsets are altered in the
burn wound early after injury.PLoS ONE12, e0179015 (2017).
68. Garrood, T., Lee, L. & Pitzalis, C. Molecular mechanisms of cell recruitment to
inflammatory sites: general and tissue-specifi
c pathways.Rheumatology45,
250–260 (2006).
69. Rose, D. M. et al. Paxillin binding to theα4 integrin subunit stimulates LFA-1
(integrinαLβ2-dependent T cell migration by augmenting the activation of
focal adhesion kinase/proline-rich tyrosine kinase-2.J. Immunol.170, 5912
(2003).
70. Cantor, J. M., Rose, D. M., Slepak, M. & Ginsberg, M. H. Fine-tuning tumor
immunity with integrin trans-regulation.Cancer Immunol. Res.3, 661 (2015).
71. Fu, X., Rivera, A., Tao, L. & Zhang, X. Genetically modified T cells targeting
neovasculature efficiently destroy tumor blood vessels, shrink established solid
tumors, and increase nanoparticle delivery.Int. J. Cancer133, 2483–2492 (2013).
72. Chinnasamy, D. et al. Local delivery of interleukin-12 using T cells targeting
VEGF receptor-2 eradicates multiple vascularized tumors in mice.Clin. Cancer
Res.18, 1672 (2012).
73. Kanagawa, N. et al. CC-chemokine ligand 17 gene therapy induces tumor
regression through augmentation of tumor-infiltrating immune cells in a murine
model of preexisting CT26 colon carcinoma.Int. J. Cancer121, 2013–2022
(2007).
74. Lavergne, E. et al. Intratumoral CC chemokine ligand 5 overexpression delays
tumor growth and increases tumor cell infiltration.J. Immunol.173, 3755 (2004).
75. Adusumilli, P. S. et al. Regional delivery of mesothelin-targeted CAR T cell
therapy generates potent and long-lasting CD4-dependent tumor immunity.Sci.
Transl. Med.6, 261ra151 (2014).
76. Tchou, J. et al. Safety and efficacy of intratumoral injections of chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR) T cells in metastatic breast cancer.Cancer Immunol. Res.5, 1152
(2017).
77. Noguchi, T. et al. Intracellular tumor-associated antigens represent effective
targets for passive immunotherapy.Cancer Res.72, 1672 (2012).
78. Donnard, E. et al. Mutational analysis of genes coding for cell surface proteins in
colorectal cancer cell lines reveal novel altered pathways, druggable mutations
and mutated epitopes for targeted therapy.Oncotarget5, 9199–9213 (2014).
79. Durgeau, A., Virk, Y., Corgnac, S. & Mami-Chouaib, F. Recent advances in tar-
geting CD8 T cell immunity for more effective cancer immunotherapy.Front.
Immunol.9, 14 (2018).
80. Hinrichs, C. S. & Restifo, N. P. Reassessing target antigens for adoptive T cell
therapy.Nat. Biotechnol.31, 999–1008 (2013).
81. Gjerstorff, M. F., Andersen, M. H. & Ditzel, H. J. Oncogenic cancer/testis antigens:
prime candidates for immunotherapy.Oncotarget6, 15772–15787 (2015).
82. Sotillo, E. et al. Convergence of acquired mutations and alternative splicing of
CD19 enables resistance to CART-19 immunotherapy.Cancer  Discov.5,
1282–1295 (2015).
83. Whilding Lynsey, M., Vallath, S. & Maher, J. The integrinαvβ6: a novel target for
CAR T cell immunotherapy?Biochem Soc. Trans.44, 349 (2016).
84. Posey, A. D. et al. Engineered CAR T cells targeting the cancer-associated Tn-
glycoform of the membrane Mucin MUC1 control adenocarcinoma.Immunity
44, 1444–1454 (2016).
85. Hosen, N. et al. The activated conformation of integrinβ7 is a novel multiple
myeloma–specific target for CAR T cell therapy.Nat. Med.23, 1436 (2017).
86. Dudal, S. et al. Application of a MABEL approach for a T cell-bispecific mono-
clonal antibody: CEA TCB.J. Immunother.39, 279–289 (2016).
87. Suntharalingam, G. et al. Cytokine storm in a phase 1 trial of the anti-CD28
monoclonal antibody TGN1412.N. Engl. J. Med.355, 1018–1028 (2006).
88. Chen, K. H. et al. A compound chimeric antigen receptor strategy for targeting
multiple myeloma.Leukemia32, 402 (2017).
89. Kloss, C. C., Condomines, M., Cartellieri, M., Bachmann, M. & Sadelain, M. Com-
binatorial antigen recognition with balanced signaling promotes selective
tumor eradication by engineered T cells.Nat. Biotechnol.31, 71 (2012).
90. Wilkie, S. et al. Dual targeting of ErbB2 and MUC1 in breast cancer using chi-
meric antigen receptors engineered to provide complementary signaling.J. Clin.
Immunol.32, 1059–1070 (2012).
91. Duong, C. P. M., Westwood, J. A., Berry, L. J., Darcy, P. K. & Kershaw, M. H.
Enhancing the specificity of T cell cultures for adoptive immunotherapy of
cancer.Immunotherapy3,33–48 (2010).
92. Zhong, X.-S., Matsushita, M., Plotkin, J., Riviere, I. & Sadelain, M. Chimeric antigen
receptors combining 4-1BB and CD28 signaling domains augment PI(3)kinase/
AKT/Bcl-X(L) activation and CD8(+) T cell-mediated tumor eradication.Mol. Ther.
18, 413–420 (2010).
93. Fraietta, J. A. et al. Determinants of response and resistance to CD19 chimeric
antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.Nat. Med.
24, 563
–571 (2018).
94. Melero, I., Rouzaut, A., Motz, G. & Coukos, G. T cell and NK-cell infiltration into
solid tumors: a key limiting factor for efficacious cancer immunotherapy.Cancer
Discov.4, 522–526 (2014).
95. Ng, S. S. M. et al. Heterodimeric IL15 treatment enhances tumor infiltration,
persistence, and effector functions of adoptively transferred tumor-specific
T cells in the absence of lymphodepletion.Clin. Cancer Res.23, 2817 (2017).
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
36
96. Wu, C.-Y., Roybal, K. T., Puchner, E. M., Onuffer, J. & Lim, W. A. Remote control of
therapeutic T cells through a small molecule-gated chimeric receptor.Science
350, aab4077-aab (2015).
97. Di Stasi, A. et al. Inducible apoptosis as a safety switch for adoptive cell therapy.
N. Engl. J. Med.365, 1673–1683 (2011).
98. Wang, X. et al. A transgene-encoded cell surface polypeptide for selection,
in vivo tracking, and ablation of engineered cells.Blood118, 1255–1263 (2011).
99. Qasim, W. et al. T cell transduction and suicide with an enhanced mutant
thymidine kinase.Gene Ther.9, 824 (2002).
100. Straathof, K. C. et al. An inducible caspase 9 safety switch for T cell therapy.
Blood105, 4247–4254 (2005).
101. Caratelli, S. et al. FCγchimeric receptor-engineered T cells: methodology,
advantages, limitations, and clinical relevance.Front. Immunol.8, 457 (2017).
102. Cho, J. H., Collins, J. J. & Wong, W. W. Universal chimeric antigen receptors for
multiplexed and logical control of T cell responses.Cell173,1–13 (2018).
103. Tamada, K. et al. Redirecting gene-modified T cells toward various cancer types
using tagged antibodies.Clin. Cancer Res.18, 6436 (2012).
104. Kobold, S. et al. Selective bispecific T cell recruiting antibody and antitumor
activity of adoptive T cell transfer.J. Natl. Cancer Inst.107, dju364-dju (2015).
105. Gattinoni, L., Powell, D. J. Jr, Rosenberg, S. A. & Restifo, N. P. Adoptive immu-
notherapy for cancer: building on success.Nat. Rev. Immunol.6, 383–393 (2006).
106. Rupp, L. J. et al. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated PD-1 disruption enhances anti-tumor
efficacy of human chimeric antigen receptor T cells.Sci. Rep.7, 737 (2017).
107. Ren, J. et al. A versatile system for rapid multiplex genome-edited CAR T cell
generation.Oncotarget8, 17002–17011 (2017).
108. Ren, J. et al. Multiplex genome editing to generate universal CAR T cells resistant
to PD1 inhibition.Clin. Cancer Res.23, 2255–2266 (2017).
109. Naidoo, J. et al. Toxicities of the anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 immune checkpoint
antibodies.Ann. Oncol.26, 2375–2391 (2015).
110. Baylis, F. & McLeod, M. First-in-human phase 1 CRISPR gene editing cancer trials:
are we ready?.Curr. Gene Ther.17, 309–319 (2017).
111. Ankri, C., Shamalov, K., Horovitz-Fried, M., Mauer, S. & Cohen, C. J. Human T cells
engineered to express a programmed death 1/28 costimulatory retargeting
molecule display enhanced antitumor activity.J. Immunol.191,4121–4129 (2013).
112. Prosser, M. E., Brown, C. E., Shami, A. F., Forman, S. J. & Jensen, M. C. Tumor PD-
L1 co-stimulates primary human CD8+cytotoxic T cells modified to express a
PD1:CD28 chimeric receptor.Mol. Immunol.51, 263–272 (2012).
113. Shin, J. H. et al. Positive conversion of negative signaling of CTLA4 potentiates
antitumor efficacy of adoptive T cell therapy in murine tumor models.Blood
119, 5678–5687 (2012).
114. Kobold, S. et al. Impact of a new fusion receptor on PD-1–mediated immuno-
suppression in adoptive T cell therapy.J. Natl. Cancer Inst.107, djv146 (2015).
115. Liu, X. et al. A chimeric switch-receptor targeting PD1 augments the efficacy of
second generation CAR T-Cells in advanced solid tumors.Cancer Res.76,
1578–1590 (2016).
116. Leen, A. M. et al. Reversal of tumor immune inhibition using a chimeric cytokine
receptor.Mol. Ther.22, 1211–1220 (2014).
117. Roybal Kole, T. et al. Precision tumor recognition by T cells with combinatorial
antigen-sensing circuits.Cell164, 770–779 (2016).
118. Foster, A. E. et al. Antitumor activity of EBV-specific T lymphocytes transduced
with a dominant negative TGF-βreceptor.J. Immunother.31, 500–505 (2008).
119. Chen, N., Morello, A., Tano, Z. & Adusumilli, P. S. CAR T cell intrinsic PD-1
checkpoint blockade: a two-in-one approach for solid tumor immunotherapy.
Oncoimmunology6, e1273302 (2017).
120. Cherkassky, L. et al. Human CAR T cells with cell-intrinsic PD-1 checkpoint
blockade resist tumor-mediated inhibition.J. Clin. Invest.126, 3130–3144 (2016).
121. Massagué, J. TGFβin.Cancer Cell134, 215–230 (2008).
122. Gorelik, L. & Flavell, R. A. Immune-mediated eradication of tumors through the
blockade of transforming growth factor-βsignaling in T cells.Nat. Med.7, 1118
(2001).
123. Dasgupta, S., Bhattacharya-Chatterjee, M., O’Malley, B. W. & Chatterjee, S. K.
Inhibition of NK cell activity through TGF-β
1 by downregulation of NKG2D in a
murine model of head and neck cancer.J. Immunol.175, 5541–5550 (2005).
124. John, L. B. et al. Anti-PD-1 antibody therapy potently enhances the eradication of
established tumors by gene-modified T cells.Clin. Cancer Res.19,5636–5646 (2013).
125. Chong, E. A. et al. PD-1 blockade modulates chimeric antigen receptor
(CAR)–modified T cells: refueling the CAR.Blood129, 1039–1041 (2017).
126. Xu, X.-J. et al. Multiparameter comparative analysis reveals differential impacts
of various cytokines on CART cell phenotype and function ex vivo and in vivo.
Oncotarget7, 82354–82368 (2016).
127. Rosenberg, S. A. IL-2: thefirst effective immunotherapy for human cancer.J.
Immunol.192, 5451–5458 (2014).
128. Trinchieri, G. Interleukin-12 and the regulation of innate resistance and adaptive
immunity.Nat. Rev. Immunol.3, 133 (2003).
129. Kubin, M., Kamoun, M. & Trinchieri, G. Interleukin 12 synergizes with B7/CD28
interaction in inducing efficient proliferation and cytokine production of human
T cells.J. Exp. Med.180, 211–222 (1994).
130. Ferlazzo, G. et al. Distinct roles of IL-12 and IL-15 in human natural killer cell
activation by dendritic cells from secondary lymphoid organs.Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA101, 16606–16611 (2004).
131. Cao, X. et al. IL-12 stimulates interferon-gamma mediated inhibition of tumor-
induced regulatory T cell proliferation and enhances tumor clearance.Cancer
Res.69, 8700–8709 (2009).
132. Pegram, H. J. et al. Tumor-targeted T cells modified to secrete IL-12 eradicate
systemic tumors without need for prior conditioning.Blood119, 4133–4141
(2012).
133. Yeku, O. O., Purdon, T. J., Koneru, M., Spriggs, D. & Brentjens, R. J. Armored CAR
T cells enhance antitumor efficacy and overcome the tumor microenvironment.
Sci. Rep.7, 10541 (2017).
134. Koneru, M., Purdon, T. J., Spriggs, D., Koneru, S. & Brentjens, R. J. IL-12 secreting
tumor-targeted chimeric antigen receptor T cells eradicate ovarian tumors
in vivo.Oncoimmunology4, e994446 (2015).
135. Leonard, J. P. et al. Effects of single-dose interleukin-12 exposure on interleukin-
12–associated toxicity and interferon-γ
production.Blood90, 2541–2548
(1997).
136. Zhang, L. et al. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes genetically engineered with an
inducible gene encoding interleukin-12 for the immunotherapy of metastatic
melanoma.Clin. Cancer Res.21, 2278–2288 (2015).
137. You, F. et al. Phase 1 clinical trial demonstrated that MUC1 positive metastatic
seminal vesicle cancer can be effectively eradicated by modified Anti-MUC1
chimeric antigen receptor transduced T cells. Science China.Life Sci.59,
386–397 (2016).
138. Koneru, M., O’Cearbhaill, R., Pendharkar, S., Spriggs, D. R. & Brentjens, R. J. A
phase I clinical trial of adoptive T cell therapy using IL-12 secreting MUC-16
(ecto) directed chimeric antigen receptors for recurrent ovarian cancer.J. Transl.
Med.13, 102 (2015).
139. Nakamura, K., Okamura, H., Wada, M., Nagata, K. & Tamura, T. Endotoxin-induced
serum factor that stimulates gamma interferon production.Infect. Immun.57,
590–595 (1989).
140. Robertson, M. J. et al. A dose-escalation study of recombinant human
interleukin-18 using two different schedules of administration in patients with
cancer.Clin. Cancer Res.14, 3462–3469 (2008).
141. Hu, B. et al. Augmentation of antitumor immunity by human and mouse CAR
T cells secreting IL-18.Cell Rep.20, 3025–3033 (2017).
142. Chmielewski, M. & Abken, H. CAR T cells releasing IL-18 convert to T-Bet high
FoxO1 low effectors that exhibit augmented activity against advanced solid
tumors.Cell Rep.21, 3205–3219 (2017).
143. Tamang, D. L. et al. Induction of granzyme B and T cell cytotoxic capacity by IL-2
or IL-15 without antigens: multiclonal responses that are extremely lytic if
triggered and short-lived after cytokine withdrawal.Cytokine36, 148–159
(2006).
144. Hoyos, V. et al. Engineering CD19-specific T lymphocytes with interleukin-15
and a suicide gene to enhance their anti-lymphoma/leukemia effects and
safety.Leukemia24, 1160–1170 (2010).
145. Boice, M. et al. Loss of the HVEM tumor suppressor in lymphoma and restoration
by modified CAR-T cells.Cell167, 405–418 (2016). e13.
146. Cheung, K.-J. J. et al. Acquired TNFRSF14 mutations in follicular lymphoma are
associated with worse prognosis.Cancer Res.70, 9166
–9174 (2010).
147. Suarez, E. R. et al. Chimeric antigen receptor T cells secreting anti-PD-L1 anti-
bodies more effectively regress renal cell carcinoma in a humanized mouse
model.Oncotarget7, 34341–34355 (2016).
148. Li,  S.  et  al.  Enhanced  cancer  immunotherapy  by  chimeric  antigen
receptor–modified T cells engineered to secrete checkpoint inhibitors.Clin.
Cancer Res.23, 6982–6992 (2017).
Teaching an old dog new tricks: next-generation CAR T cells
N Tokarew et al.
37