1732Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
A community approach to dog bite prevention
Table of Contents
Introduction and problem statement. . . . . . 1733
Scope of the problem
Which dogs bite?
Dog bite costs to a community
This program
Multidisciplinary and multiprofessional 
groups. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1734
Identify dog bite issues in the community
Identify potential partners, allies, support, and 
funding sources
Develop an advisory council
Infrastructure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1735
Program coordinator
Animal control agencies
Preventive measures
After a bite occurs
Bite data reporting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1738
What should be reported?
Who should report?
Who should receive reports?
Data management, analysis, interpretation, 
and dissemination
Education. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1739
Public officials and community leaders
Professionals
Public
Media. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1743
Know the media
A spokesperson
Have information readily available
Ways to effectively convey information
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1745
Appendices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1746
1.  Groups potentially involved in dog bite 
prevention
2.  Model dog and cat control ordinance
3.  Recommended data elements for reports of 
dog bites
4.  Model legislation for the identification and 
regulation of “dangerous” dogs
5.  Suggested reading for professionals
MEMBERS OF THETASKFORCE
Bonnie  V.  Beaver,  DVM,  MS,  DACVB  (Chair),  Department  of
Small Animal Medicine and Surgery, Texas A&M University,
College  Station,  TX  77843-4474,  representing  the  AVMA
Executive Board.
M. Douglas Baker, MD, FAAP, Pediatric Emergency Department,
Room WP143, Yale-New Haven Children’s Hospital, 20 York
St,  New  Haven,  CT  06504,  representing  the  American
Academy of Pediatrics.
Robert  C.  Gloster,  MD,  FACEP,  Swedish  Hospital  Medical
Center, PO Box 14999, Seattle, WA 98114, representing the
American College of Emergency Physicians.
William  A.  Grant,  DVM,  Community  Veterinary  Hospital,
13200 Euclid St, Garden Grove, CA 92843, representing the
Professional Liability Insurance Trust.
James  M.  Harris,  DVM,  Montclair  Veterinary  Clinic  and
Hospital,  1961  Mountain  Blvd,  Oakland,  CA  94611,  repre-
senting the AVMA Committee on the Human-Animal Bond.
Benjamin L. Hart, DVM, PhD, DACVB, Department of Anatomy,
Physiology, and Cell Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University  of  California,  Davis,  CA  95616,  representing  the
American College of Veterinary Behaviorists.
Danny  H.  Hattaway,  BS,  Underwriting  Consultant,  State  Farm
Insurance, 1 State Farm Plaza, D-1, Bloomington, IL 61701,
representing the insurance industry.
Thomas  Houston,  MD,  Director,  Science  and  Public  Health
Advocacy  Programs,  American  Medical  Association,  515  N
State  St,  Chicago,  IL  60610,  representing  the  American
Medical Association.
James  R.  Koschmann,  DVM,  MS,  Crossroads  Animal  Hospital,
4910  Crossroads  Dr,  El  Paso,  TX  79922,  representing  the
AVMA Animal Welfare Committee.
Randall   Lockwood,   PhD,   Vice   President/Research   and
Educational Outreach, Humane Society of the United States,
2100 L St NW, Washington, DC 20037, representing humane
organizations.
Don   Rieck,   BS,   Chief   Animal   Control   Officer,   Health
Department,  City  of  Sioux  Falls,  132  North  Dakota  Ave,
Sioux  Falls,  SD  57104,  representing  the  National  Animal
Control Association.
Jeffrey J. Sacks, MD, MPH, Medical Epidemiologist, Centers for
Disease  Control  and  Prevention,  4770  Buford  Hwy,  NE
(Mailstop  K-45),  Atlanta,  GA  30341,  representing  the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
William S. Strauss, JD, 235A Windsor Pl, Brooklyn, NY 11215,
representing the legal profession.
Jan Strother, DVM, 809 Hwy 36 E, Hartselle, AL 35640, repre-
senting the AVMA Council on Public Relations.
STAFFSUPPORT
Gail C. Golab, PhD, DVM, Division of Education and Research,
American Veterinary Medical Association, 1931 N Meacham
Rd, Ste 100, Schaumburg, IL 60173, staff consultant.
Julie  Horvath,  BS,  Division  of  Education  and  Research,
American Veterinary Medical Association, 1931 N Meacham
Rd, Ste 100, Schaumburg, IL 60173, staff assistant.
American Veterinary Medical Association 
Task Force on Canine Aggression and Human-Canine Interactions
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1732
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1733
Introduction and Problem Statement
Dog bites are a serious public health problem that
inflicts  considerable  physical  and  emotional  damage
on  victims  and  incurs  immeasurable  hidden  costs  to
communities. Bites have been tolerated as a job-related
hazard  for  utility  and  postal  workers,  but  for  many
communities the problem may be more encompassing.
Following a severe attack, there is usually an outcry to
do  something,  and  the  something  that  is  done  often
reflects  a  knee-jerk  response.  Only  later  do  officials
realize that the response was not effective and, in fact,
may  have  been  divisive  for  the  community.  To  assist
communities  in  avoiding  such  ineffective  responses,
the   AVMA   convened   a   Task   Force   on   Canine
Aggression and Human-Canine Interactions. Although
the  number  of  injuries  will  never  be  reduced  to  zero,
Task  Force  members  believe  a  well-planned  proactive
community  approach  can  make  a  substantial  impact.
The information contained in this report is intended to
help  leaders  find  effective  ways  to  address  their  com-
munity’s dog bite concerns.
a
Scope of the problem
Dogs have shared their lives with humans for more
than  12,000  years,
1
and  that  coexistence  has  con-
tributed substantially to humans’ quality of life. In the
United  States,  there  are  slightly  more  than  53  million
dogs sharing the human-canine bond,
2,3
more dogs per
capita  than  in  any  other  country  in  the  world.
1
Unfortunately, a few dogs do not live up to their image
as mankind’s best friend, and an estimated 4.5 million
people are bitten each year,
4,5
although the actual num-
ber injured is unknown.
6
Approximately 334,000 peo-
ple are admitted to US emergency departments annual-
ly  with  dog  bite-associated  injuries,  and  another
466,000  are  seen  in  other  medical  settings.
6
An
unknown number of other people who have been bit-
ten  do  not  sustain  injuries  deemed  serious  enough  to
require  medical  attention.  Still  another  group  of  indi-
viduals  is  not  represented  by  these  data,  those  that
incur injuries secondary to a bite or attempted bite. For
example,  a  jogger  may  trip  and  break  an  arm  while
fleeing from a threatening dog.
Of  concern  too  are  the  demographics  of  typical
dog bite victims. Almost half are children younger than
12 years old.
6-8
People more than 70 years old comprise
10% of those bitten and 20% of those killed.
9,10
Direct  costs  of  dog  bite  injuries  are  high.  The
insurance industry estimates it pays more than $1 bil-
lion/y  in  homeowners’  liability  claims  resulting  from
dog  bites.
11
Hospital  expenses  for  dog  bite-related
emergency  visits  are  estimated  at  $102.4  million.
6
There  are  also  medical  insurance  claims,  workmen’s
compensation  claims,  lost  wages,  and  sick  leave-asso-
ciated business costs that have not been calculated.
Which dogs bite?
An often-asked question is what breed or breeds of
dogs  are  most  “dangerous”?  This  inquiry  can  be
prompted  by  a  serious  attack  by  a  specific  dog,  or  it
may be the result of media-driven portrayals of a spe-
cific breed as “dangerous.”
12,13
Although this is a com-
mon concern, singling out 1 or 2 breeds for control can
result  in  a  false  sense  of  accomplishment.
14
Doing  so
ignores  the  true  scope  of  the  problem  and  will  not
result  in  a  responsible  approach  to  protecting  a  com-
munity’s citizens.
Dog bite statistics are not really statistics, and they
do  not  give  an  accurate  picture  of  dogs  that  bite.
7
Invariably the numbers will show that dogs from pop-
ular large breeds are a problem. This should be expect-
ed, because big dogs can physically do more damage if
they do bite, and any popular breed has more individ-
uals  that  could  bite.  Dogs  from  small  breeds  also  bite
and are capable of causing severe injury. There are sev-
eral  reasons  why  it  is  not  possible  to  calculate  a  bite
rate  for  a  breed  or  to  compare  rates  between  breeds.
First, the breed of the biting dog may not be accurate-
ly  recorded,  and  mixed-breed  dogs  are  commonly
described as if they were purebreds. Second, the actual
number  of  bites  that  occur  in  a  community  is  not
known,  especially  if  they  did  not  result  in  serious
injury. Third, the number of dogs of a particular breed
or  combination  of  breeds  in  a  community  is  not
known, because it is rare for all dogs in a community
to  be  licensed,  and  existing  licensing  data  is  then
incomplete.
7
Breed data likely vary between communi-
ties,  states,  or  regions,  and  can  even  vary  between
neighborhoods within a community.
Wolf  hybrids  are  just  that:  hybrids  between  wild
and  domestic  canids.  Their  behavior  is  unpredictable
because  of  this  hybridization,  and  they  are  usually
treated as wild animals by local or state statutes. Wolf
hybrids are not addressed by this program.
Sex  differences  do  emerge  from  data  on  various
types of aggression. Intact (unneutered) male dogs rep-
resented 80% of dogs presented to veterinary behavior-
ists  for  dominance  aggression,  the  most  commonly
diagnosed  type  of  aggression.
1
Intact  males  are  also
involved in 70 to 76% of reported dog bite incidents.
7,15
The sex distribution of dogs inflicting unreported bites
is  not  known.  Unspayed  females  that  are  not  part  of  a
carefully  planned  breeding  program  may  attract  free-
roaming  males,  which  increases  bite  risk  to  people
through  increased  exposure  to  unfamiliar  dogs.  Dams
are protective of their puppies and may bite those who
try  to  handle  the  young.  Unspayed  females  may  also
contribute to the population of unwanted dogs that are
often  acquired  by  people  who  do  not  understand  the
long-term commitment they have undertaken, that are
surrendered   to   animal   shelters   where   many   are
destroyed,  or  that  are  turned  loose  under  the  miscon-
ception that they can successfully fend for themselves.
16
Dog bite costs to a community
Costs  associated  with  dog  bite  injuries  cannot  be
readily  measured,  because  so  many  intangible  quality
of life issues are involved. This makes it more difficult
for community councils to justify the time, effort, and
expense necessary to institute a bite reduction program
when  compared  to  a  new  fire  truck,  street  paving,  or
city  park.  Intangible  costs  include  time  spent  by  vol-
unteer and paid community officials on animal-related
issues,  deterioration  of  relationships  between  neigh-
bors,  building  appropriate  medical  support,  citizens’
concerns  about  neighborhood  safety  for  children,
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1733
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
1734Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
homeowners’  insurance  costs  within  the  community,
and  animal  shelter  support  for  unwanted  pets.  These
are quality of life issues that ultimately determine the
desirability of a community to its citizens and that can
motivate  proactive  community  officials  to  institute  a
prevention program.
This program
Reducing the incidence of dog bites requires active
community  involvement;  passive  attention  or  a  token
commitment  is  not  sufficient.  By  actively  focusing  on
dog  bite  prevention,  the  State  of  Nevada  was  able  to
reduce  the  incidence  of  bites  by  approximately  15%.
b
Members of the Task Force represented a broad range
of  disciplines  and  designed  the  program  presented
here.  It  was  recognized  that  the  community  approach
must be multidisciplinary and that different communi-
ties  will  have  different  needs  based  on  their  level  of
commitment,  preexisting  programs,  and  available
resources. Although the best results will be obtained by
adopting the entire prevention program, the program is
designed  so  that  it  may  be  adopted  as  a  whole  or  in
part.  Either  way,  the  goal  remains  to  reduce  the  inci-
dence  of  dog  bites  within  communities  and  improve
quality of life for their citizens.
Multidisciplinary and 
Multiprofessional Groups
It  is  unlikely  that  a  dog  bite  prevention  program
will  begin  in  a  complete  vacuum.  Typically,  some  for-
mal program is already in place under the auspices of
animal  control,  the  health  department,  or  local  law
enforcement.  Efforts  may  also  be  under  way  by  other
groups  such  as  educators  or  dog  breeders.  It  makes
sense  to  identify  related  activities  to  determine  what
needs are not being met, find likely sources of support
or  resistance,  and  avoid  duplication  of  effort  and
potential turf battles (Appendix 1).
c
Identify dog bite issues in the community
Each community has a unique set of dog bite-relat-
ed  problems  and  its  own  approaches  to  confronting
them.  A  central  task  is  to  identify  these  particular
issues.  The  project  begins  by  assessing  the  political
landscape regarding dog bites and dog bite prevention.
Before launching a program, it is useful to pinpoint the
degree of current and potential support among corpo-
rate  and  community  leaders  as  well  as  legislators  and
senior staff in the dog bite prevention program’s spon-
soring agency. 
Recognize hot buttons—Crafting a program is eas-
ier if the objectives mesh with a highly visible commu-
nity  issue.  For  example,  there  may  be  public  outcry
about dog waste or a publicized dog attack. Such a sit-
uation may provide impetus for a campaign to support
licensing  and  leash  laws  or  ordinances  pertaining  to
reporting  dog  bites.  When  community  groups  and  the
media have already invested in finding a solution to the
dog bite problem, program organizers can dovetail their
efforts and work collaboratively with these groups.
Community interest—Knowing the degree of sup-
port that exists for a prevention program is important.
The prior existence of a program suggests support, but
this may not always be the case. The active support of
a  commissioner  or  health  department  head  (local  or
state)  is  critical,  because  without  his/her  backing,  a
fledgling dog bite prevention program is vulnerable to
shifting  funding  initiatives  and  political  pressure.
Public officials are influenced by vocal well-organized
constituencies,  so  it  is  important  to  know  what  dog
bite-related agendas are getting politicians’ attention. It
also  helps  to  know  whether  any  legislators  have  a
strong interest in the dog bite issue.
Dogs  in  the  news—News  accounts  can  provide
clues as to how dog-related issues have played out over
time. Compare these accounts with available statistical
data and scientific assessments for reliability.
Identify potential partners, allies, support, and fund-
ing sources
Determine which organizations in the community
are  likely  to  support  program  efforts  or  resist  them.
Some individuals and organizations will emerge as nat-
ural allies; some old hands will be glad to work with a
new partner in the dog bite prevention field, and some
will  actively  welcome  a  new  focal  point  for  dog  bite
prevention activity. Learning about various entities and
their interest and involvement in dog bite control can
help answer questions in the following areas.
Community  resources—Organizations,  agencies,
businesses,  and  individuals  offering  training,  assis-
tance, consulting, library or computer search capabili-
ties,  in-kind  contributions,  volunteer  help,  or  supple-
mental funding must be identified.
Currently  available  data—Before  launching  a
major effort to collect dog bite data, it is wise to deter-
mine  whether  an  assessment  has  already  been  done.
Ask  about  reports  related  to  injuries  and  costs  from
dog bites, surveys that include dog bite or dog owner-
ship  information,  opinion  surveys  or  other  studies
describing community perceptions about the need for
dog bite prevention, and similar information. If possi-
ble,  find  out  what  happened  to  existing  assessments
and related recommendations. Knowing the history of
previous evaluation and prevention efforts will help in
development  of  a  new  program.  If  an  assessment  has
been  done,  determine  whether  methods  and  conclu-
sions are sound. 
Legislation—It  is  important  to  know  what  inter-
ventions (eg, leash laws, “dangerous” dog ordinances)
have  been  previously  introduced  and  their  history  of
success.  Individuals  involved  in  these  efforts  may  be
valuable  allies  in  new  programs.  In  addition,  current
ordinances should be evaluated to determine whether
enforcement or revision could increase their effective-
ness.
Barriers—Ownership of particular dog bite issues
and potential turf battles should be confronted realisti-
cally. In addition, it must be acknowledged that a dog
bite  prevention  program  may  attract  opposition  from
groups  on  philosophical  grounds  (eg,  groups  that
strongly support personal freedom argue that the gov-
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1734
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
ernment should not mandate licensing of dogs). Clubs
for  specific  breeds  may  not  be  supportive  if  they  fear
their  breed  will  be  singled  out  in  a  negative  way.
Barriers  can  be  overcome  by  a  fresh  approach  to  old
problems or by agreeing to carve out areas of responsi-
bility  among  interested  groups.  Typically,  there  are
many  more  problems  than  there  are  organizations  to
tackle them, so it makes sense to avoid attacking simi-
lar issues.
Develop an advisory council
Obtaining community input can be as sophisticat-
ed  as  conducting  public  opinion  surveys  or  holding
focus groups to learn about what the community sees
as  pressing  dog  bite  issues.  More  likely,  there  will  be
limited  funds  at  the  outset  of  the  program,  so  more
informal but also potentially valuable approaches may
be  required.  These  include  meetings  with  potential
partners  and  interested  groups  to  learn  about  their
constituencies’  concerns.  This  type  of  informal  inter-
view can be a great help in uncovering key dog-related
issues  as  perceived  by  the  community.  Talking  with
people  in  neighborhoods  most  affected  by  dog  bite
problems is important. For example, if there is a prob-
lem  with  dog  bites  in  low-income  neighborhoods,
obtaining  the  views  of  people  living  there  can  help
identify the nature of the problem and potential solu-
tions. 
An advisory council or task force that represents a
wide  spectrum  of  community  concerns  and  perspec-
tives creates a source of support for program initiatives.
Advisory  groups  provide  guidance  for  a  dog  bite  pre-
vention program and may focus on specific high-prior-
ity dog bite issues. Although organizing and maintain-
ing  an  advisory  council  is  labor-intensive,  it  can  sub-
stantially benefit the program. Members may be able to
provide access to useful information that is not other-
wise  easy  for  the  coordinator  to  obtain.  Members  can
also identify ways in which the program can work with
appropriate  voluntary  organizations  and  associations.
People  with  experience  in  dog  bite  control  can  offer
perspective about the program and help identify poten-
tial pitfalls as well as successful strategies. Participation
by  members  representing  community  organizations
builds a sense of ownership in the dog bite prevention
program.
Logistics  in  starting  an  advisory  council  include
identifying  organizations  and  individuals  that  should
participate  (Appendix  1),  determining  the  size  of  the
council,  establishing  a  structure  and  operating  proce-
dures for the council and its regular meetings, assign-
ing staff support, determining the relationship between
the  staff  and  the  council,  and  reaching  an  agreement
about key tasks. When community members and gov-
ernment officials work together to support the creation
and development of a local task force, it enhances the
group’s visibility and impact.
To foster an involved and active advisory council,
professionals  agree  that  several  criteria  must  be  met.
The  number  of  participants  should  be  kept  manage-
able; 10 to 12 is a size that works well. If it is necessary
to  have  more  members  for  political  reasons,  breaking
the group into smaller committees or working groups
will improve the dynamics. For example, groups could
coalesce around data issues, legislation and policy, and
so  on.  Involving  participants  from  the  start  in  mean-
ingful  tasks  will  underscore  that  this  is  a  productive
group. In addition, people are more likely to support a
program  they  participated  in  creating,  because  they
have a sense of ownership. 
Because each community’s needs and priorities dif-
fer,  the  advisory  council’s  major  tasks  will  vary.  The
advisory council or one of its working groups may con-
sider the following activities:
'coordinating efforts among participating organiza-
tions
'developing an action plan
'establishing dog bite prevention priorities
'generating  public  and  legislative  support  for  dog
bite control
'identifying dog bite reporting sources
'interpreting data
'identifying  and  obtaining  resources  for  program
activities (educational, financial, staffing)
'providing technical expertise for the program
'recommending goals and objectives for prevention
It  is  recommended  that  the  program  be  overseen
by  a  paid  coordinator.  The  program  coordinator  and
other  staff  involved  can  contribute  to  the  advisory
council’s success by good meeting planning and prepa-
ration, regular communication with members, working
with the advisory council chairperson to set the agen-
da,  and  helping  to  solve  problems  that  threaten  to
derail the process. As with any volunteer effort, a dog
bite  prevention  advisory  council  is  likely  to  thrive  if
the  coordinator  nurtures  its  members  with  regular
expressions of appreciation.
Infrastructure
A coordinated effort is essential for success in any
venture, and each individual or organization involved
must  have  a  clear  sense  of  their/its  responsibilities.
Reducing the incidence of dog bites requires the coop-
eration of many groups, including animal control agen-
cies, the human and veterinary medical communities,
educators, departments of health, and the local licens-
ing  authority.  Open  and  consistent  communication  is
an integral part of an effective program, and one entity
should be designated as the coordinating agency. A log-
ical  coordinating  agency  would  be  the  health  depart-
ment  or  animal  control.  In  addition,  it  is  imperative
that an appropriate agency be granted authority to con-
duct investigations and make recommendations.
Program coordinator
As  previously  mentioned,  dog  bite  prevention
efforts should be assisted by a paid staff person. Because
the diversity of input is so great, it is recommended that
the office of the advisory council’s program coordinator
be  located  within  the  municipality’s  coordinating
agency.  Individuals,  agencies,  or  organizations  that
come  into  contact  with  or  are  aware  of  a  “dangerous”
dog  or  risky  situation  should  provide  this  information
to  the  coordinator.  The  coordinator  should  then  relay
all information to the proper recipients. 
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1735
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1735
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
1736Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
Animal control agencies
Animal  control  officers  are  the  frontline  in  con-
trolling  animal  bites.  A  well-resourced  animal  control
agency is vital for public health and safety within any
community. In some communities, animal control is a
stand-alone  agency.  In  others  it  is  administered
through the local city or county health director or is a
subsidiary  of  the  local  police  department  or  sheriff’s
office. Wherever located, the functions of animal con-
trol within communities are multiple, including:
'training  of  animal  control  officers  and  ancillary
personnel
'licensing of dogs and cats
'enforcement  of  leash  laws,  ordinances,  regula-
tions, and statutes
'control  of  unrestrained  and  free-roaming  animal
populations
'investigation of animal bite-related incidents
'administration of rabies quarantine programs after
an animal bites
'bite data management, analysis, and dissemination
regulation of “dangerous” animals
'educational   outreach   within   the   community
regarding responsible ownership, spay/neuter pro-
grams, control of “dangerous” animals, rabies vac-
cinations
'coordination of efforts
Larger communities often possess more resources
to  properly  fund  animal  control  agencies  and  provide
adequate  staff
17
and  training;  however,  smaller  animal
control programs can also be effective, even when they
operate  on  a  limited  budget.  Dedicated  personnel  can
accomplish  much  if  they  have  community  support,
including support from law enforcement and the judi-
ciary.
Preventive measures
Preventive measures are designed to minimize risk
and should be addressed by all communities.
Control  of  unrestrained  and  free-roaming  ani-
mals—Reasonable  and  enforceable  laws  or  ordinances
are  required  for  good  control  of  unrestrained  or  free-
roaming  animals  (Appendix  2).
18
Laws  written  to
ensure that owned animals are confined to their prop-
erty  or  kept  on  a  leash  make  freeing  a  community  of
unrestrained and free-roaming animals easier. Although
most  dog  bites  occur  on  the  property  where  the  dog
lives, unrestrained or free-roaming dogs do pose a sub-
stantial  threat  to  the  public.  Enforcement  of  restraint
laws is, therefore, essential if the incidence of dog bites
is to be reduced. It is important to protect animal own-
ers by providing an adequate amount of time for them
to claim animals that have been impounded. Because of
economic  constraints,  the  current  standard  in  the
industry  is  3  working  days;  however,  5  days  may  be
more  reasonable  to  ensure  successful  owner-animal
reunions. Control of unrestrained and free-roaming ani-
mal populations requires an adequately staffed, trained,
and funded animal control agency.
Licensing of dogs—The primary benefit of licens-
ing  animals  is  identification,  should  that  animal
become lost. Licensing also ensures rabies vaccinations
are current, allows quick identification in case of a bite
incident, and provides revenue to help offset the costs
of administering the animal control program. An effec-
tive  program  can  be  a  source  of  reliable  demographic
data as well.
Vaccinations—Rabies vaccinations are normally a
prerequisite  for  licensing  dogs  and  cats,  because  they
are  an  important  control  measure  for  a  major  public
health  concern.  In  addition  to  protecting  pets,  rabies
vaccinations  provide  a  barrier  between  infected  wild
animals  and  humans.  Vaccination  has  reduced  con-
firmed  cases  of  rabies  in  dogs  from  6,949  in  1947  to
126 in 1997.
19
Breed or type bans—Concerns about “dangerous”
dogs have caused many local governments to consider
supplementing existing animal control laws with ordi-
nances  directed  toward  control  of  specific  breeds  or
types of dogs. Members of the Task Force believe such
ordinances are inappropriate and ineffective. 
Statistics on fatalities and injuries caused by dogs
cannot be responsibly used to document the “danger-
ousness” of a particular breed, relative to other breeds,
for  several  reasons.  First,  a  dog’s  tendency  to  bite
depends on at least 5 interacting factors: heredity, early
experience,  later  socialization  and  training,  health
(medical   and   behavioral),   and   victim   behavior.
7
Second, there is no reliable way to identify the number
of dogs of a particular breed in the canine population
at  any  given  time  (eg,  10  attacks  by  Doberman
Pinschers  relative  to  a  total  population  of  10  dogs
implies  a  different  risk  than  10  attacks  by  Labrador
Retrievers  relative  to  a  population  of  1,000  dogs).
Third, statistics may be skewed, because often they do
not consider multiple incidents caused by a single ani-
mal.  Fourth,  breed  is  often  identified  by  individuals
who  are  not  familiar  with  breed  characteristics  and
who  commonly  identify  dogs  of  mixed  ancestry  as  if
they  were  purebreds.  Fifth,  the  popularity  of  breeds
changes  over  time,  making  comparison  of  breed-spe-
cific bite rates unreliable.
Breed-specific  ordinances  imply  that  there  is  an
objective method of determining the breed of a partic-
ular dog, when in fact, there is not at this time. Owners
of mixed-breed dogs or dogs that have not been regis-
tered  with  a  national  kennel  club  have  no  way  of
knowing whether their dog is one of the types identi-
fied  and  whether  they  are  required  to  comply  with  a
breed-specific ordinance. In addition, law enforcement
personnel typically have no scientific means for deter-
mining  a  dog’s  breed  that  can  withstand  the  rigors  of
legal  challenge,  nor  do  they  have  a  foolproof  method
for  deciding  whether  owners  are  in  compliance  or  in
violation  of  laws.  Such  laws  assume  that  all  dogs  of  a
certain breed are likely to bite, instead of acknowledg-
ing that most dogs are not a problem. These laws often
fail to take normal dog behavior into account and may
not assign appropriate responsibilities to owners.
Some  municipalities  have  attempted  to  address
notice  and  enforcement  problems  created  by  unregis-
tered  and  mixed-breed  dogs  by  including  in  the  ordi-
nance  a  description  of  the  breed  at  which  the  ordi-
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1736
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
nance is directed. Unfortunately, such descriptions are
usually  vague,  rely  on  subjective  visual  observation,
and result in many more dogs than those of the intend-
ed  breed  being  subject  to  the  restrictions  of  the  ordi-
nance.
Animal  control  legislation  has  traditionally  been
considered  a  constitutionally  legitimate  exercise  of
local  government  power  to  protect  public  safety  and
welfare. Breed-specific ordinances, however, raise con-
stitutional  questions  concerning  dog  owners’  four-
teenth amendment rights of due process and equal pro-
tection.
20
When  a  specific  breed  of  dog  is  selected  for
control,  2  constitutional  questions  are  raised:  first,
because  all  types  of  dogs  may  inflict  injury  to  people
and  property,  ordinances  addressing  only  1  breed  of
dog appear to be underinclusive and, therefore, violate
owners’  equal  protection  rights;  and  second,  because
identification of a dog’s breed with the certainty neces-
sary to impose sanctions on the dog’s owner is impos-
sible, such ordinances have been considered unconsti-
tutionally vague and, therefore, to violate due process.
After a bite occurs
It is important to have a well-defined postbite pro-
gram in place to minimize physical and emotional pain
for  dog  bite  victims.  This  allows  animal  control  per-
sonnel to work efficiently, protects animals that are vic-
tims  of  false  allegations,  and  provides  the  judiciary
with  reasonable  alternatives  that  address  a  variety  of
situations. State laws may dictate parts of this process.
Investigation  of  animal  bite-related  incidents—
Any animal bite or incident must be thoroughly inves-
tigated  and  substantiated  by  an  agent  of  the  empow-
ered investigating authority such as an animal control
officer, police officer, or peace officer. Ideally, the inves-
tigating  authority  should  be  the  same  authority  that
enforces  related  ordinances  or  laws  to  give  continuity
and  credibility  to  all  investigations.  Investigating  offi-
cers must be given authority to perform their duties by
statute  or  ordinance.  Clear,  concise,  standardized
information concerning the incident must be obtained
to  ensure  its  successful  resolution  and  facilitate  long-
term data collection (Appendix 3).
Postbite  rabies  quarantine  programs—A  healthy
dog that is currently vaccinated against rabies and that
bites  a  human  should  be  examined  by  a  licensed  vet-
erinarian  to  determine  its  health  status.  If  no  signs  of
illness  compatible  with  rabies  are  detected,  the  dog
should  be  quarantined.  The  Centers  for  Disease
Control  and  Prevention  has  set  the  quarantine  period
for dogs, cats, and ferrets at 10 days, including the day
of the bite. Vaccinated dogs can be allocated to 2 cate-
gories: those that have bitten a member of the immedi-
ate family and those that have bitten an individual out-
side  the  immediate  family.  Home  quarantine  can  be
considered for vaccinated dogs that have bitten a mem-
ber  of  the  immediate  family,  assuming  the  owner  can
confine  the  dog  in  a  manner  that  prevents  further
exposure.  Vaccinated  dogs  that  have  bitten  a  human
outside  of  the  immediate  family  generally  should  be
quarantined at the local shelter or veterinarian’s office.
At  the  end  of  the  quarantine  period,  the  dog  should
undergo  a  physical  examination.  In  addition,  interim
evaluations are highly recommended. 
A dog that is not currently vaccinated against rabies
and  that  bites  a  human  should  be  considered  a  rabies
suspect and be appropriately quarantined. Contact with
the dog during the quarantine period should be strictly
limited to individuals who have completed rabies pro-
phylaxis  and  are  up-to-date  on  serologic  testing  and
booster  vaccinations.  Physical  examinations  should  be
conducted  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  quarantine
period    to    determine    the    dog’s    health    status.
Quarantined dogs may be treated by a veterinarian, but
rabies  vaccines  should  not  be  administered  to  the  dog
until  the  quarantine  period  is  complete.  If  at  any  time
during  the  quarantine  period  the  dog  has  signs  of  ill-
ness  compatible  with  rabies,  it  should  be  humanely
euthanatized and samples submitted for rabies testing.
Records of all bites must be kept, including infor-
mation  specifically  identifying  the  dog  and  owner.
These  should  be  crosschecked  with  each  incident  for
evidence of a chronic problem.
Identification  and  regulation  of  “dangerous”
dogs—Certain  dogs  may  be  identified  within  a  com-
munity as being “dangerous,” usually as the result of a
serious injury or threat. That classification, because it
carries  with  it  serious  implications,  should  be  well
defined  by  law  (Appendix  4).  Any  such  definition
should  include  an  exclusion  for  justifiable  actions  of
dogs.  Procedures  should  be  outlined  that  take  into
account the potential public health threat, are reason-
able to enforce, and convey the seriousness of the situ-
ation to the owner. Although animal control officers or
their statuary counterparts are responsible for collect-
ing  information,  a  judge  or  justice  will  hear  evidence
from  animal  control  officers  and  the  dog’s  owner  to
determine whether that dog fits established criteria for
“dangerousness.”  In  some  municipalities,  a  hearing
panel  comprising  a  cross  section  of  private  citizens
hears  alleged  “dangerous”  dog  evidence  and  has  been
given  the  authority  to  declare  a  dog  “dangerous”  if
deemed  appropriate.  Any  declaration  by  a  hearing
panel, judge, or justice is subject to judicial review.
A judge, justice, or hearing panel may promulgate
orders directing an animal control officer to seize and
hold  an  alleged  “dangerous”  dog  pending  judicial
review.  If  a  dog  is  determined  to  be  “dangerous”  by  a
judge, justice, or hearing panel, the owner of that dog
is usually required to register the dog with the appro-
priate health department or animal control facility. The
judicial  process  may  also  require  the  owner  to  follow
other rigid requirements, including but not limited to
permanent  identification  of  offending  dogs,  training
and  assessment  of  dogs  and  owners,  and  having
offending dogs spayed or neutered.
Because the judicial branch is such an integral part
of  any  enforcement  action,  the  judiciary  must  assist
during  formulation  of  “dangerous”  dog  laws.  If  the
judiciary is involved, its members will be aware of the
process  that  must  be  followed  to  declare  a  dog  “dan-
gerous.”  In  addition,  they  will  be  aware  of  steps  that
have already been completed and the options available
when a particular case reaches the courts.
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1737
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1737
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
Bite Data Reporting
Accurate and complete reporting of dog bites is an
essential  element  of  a  bite  prevention  program.  These
reports  are  vital  not  only  for  case  management  and
judicial  review  but  for  planning,  implementing,  and
evaluating  the  status  of  the  problem.  Major  goals  of
comprehensive dog bite data reporting include:
'accurately defining victim demographics to identi-
fy  populations  at  greatest  risk  for  bites  and  allow
targeting of educational efforts
'defining dog and owner characteristics associated
with  higher  risk  so  that  an  actuarial  approach  to
the  dog  bite  problem  is  possible  (this  facilitates
effective program planning and proper targeting of
control measures)
'defining high risk geographic areas at city, county,
or  neighborhood  levels  so  that  limited  resources
for  animal  control  and  public  education  can  be
appropriately deployed
'establishing  baseline  data  so  that  the  impact  of
specific  elements  of  the  bite  prevention  program
can be assessed
'providing  an  accurate,  detailed,  unbiased,  objec-
tive  source  of  information  for  decision  makers,
media,  and  the  public  interested  in  the  dog  bite
problem and its prevention
'providing critical information for proper manage-
ment of dog bite cases
What should be reported?
At a minimum, a dog bite case should be defined
as  any  medically-attended  dog  bite  or  any  dog  bite
resulting  in  a  report  to  an  animal  control  or  law
enforcement  agency.  This  would  presumably  cover
those instances consuming public resources and would
also include cases that may result in litigation.
A number of data elements should be captured on
a  report  form  such  that  it  is  comprehensive  in  scope
without  placing  unnecessary  burdens  on  reporting
agencies (Appendix 3). Fatal and severe dog attacks on
humans have been associated with prior or concurrent
attacks  on  pets  or  livestock,  so  it  is  important  that
communities  also  track  those  incidents.  Maintaining
records  of  incidents  of  menacing  behaviors  of  owned
dogs running at large in the community may be found
useful in later legal actions.
Who should report?
The  goal  is  to  report  any  medically  treated  dog
bite  or  any  bite  resulting  in  a  report  to,  or  response
from, an animal control agency, humane society with
animal  control  responsibilities,  or  law  enforcement
agency. Therefore, the primary sources of data should
be:
'animal   control   or   law   enforcement   agencies
responding to a dog bite complaint
'health  professionals  attending  to  a  bite  injury
(hospital emergency staff, urgent care facility staff,
private  physicians,  school  or  camp  medical  staff,
medical  staff  of  other  entities  such  as  military
bases or reservations, and veterinarians)
Recognizing that many dog bites go unreported, a
comprehensive  program  to  assess  dog  bite  incidence
should  consider  possible  secondary  sources  of  data.
These may include:
'anonymous  surveys  of  high-risk  populations  (eg,
school-age  children)  that  may  clarify  the  true
extent of risk in a community
'anonymous  surveys  of  the  public  (eg,  phone  sur-
veys)  that  can  help  document  the  extent  of  bite
injuries and provide a basis for estimating the ratio
of unreported to reported bites
'reports  from  professionals  including  veterinarians,
animal  behaviorists,  dog  trainers,  groomers,  and
kennel operators who are informed of a bite incident
(mandating that any or all of these professions report
bites  may  be  unrealistic  given  the  potential  legal
consequences of identifying an animal as a biter)
Reporting   mandates   are   often   inconsistent
between  jurisdictions  or  are  poorly  enforced.  Current
local   and   state   reporting   regulations   should   be
reviewed,  as  should  directives  from  health  or  veteri-
nary officials. If current provisions are adequate, it may
be  necessary  to  implement  procedures  to  reeducate
professionals  concerning  their  reporting  obligations
and  periodically  remind  them  of  these  obligations.
When  a  failure  to  report  is  uncovered,  it  may  be  an
opportunity  to  gain  the  attention  of  the  professional,
because sanctions may be imposed.
Who should receive reports?
Reporting  should  be  coordinated  by  one  agency.
Logical  agencies  to  coordinate  reports  include  animal
control  or  the  public  health  department.  The  coordi-
nating agency, perhaps through the dog bite prevention
program  coordinator,  must  assume  responsibility  for
maintaining  all  information  and  disseminating  that
information  to  other  appropriate  individuals  or  agen-
cies  (eg,  veterinarians,  physicians,  the  dog  owner,  and
those involved in follow-up educational efforts).
To insure consistency and compliance, regulations
or  procedures  should  unambiguously  state  to  whom
reports  should  be  submitted  and  within  what  time
frame the reports should be submitted. 
Data  management,  analysis,  interpretation,  and  dis-
semination
Because  multiple  sources  may  report  the  same
case,  procedures  should  be  in  place  to  permit  combi-
nation  of  data  from  multiple  sources  into  a  single
report.  Avenues  should  be  developed  for  electronic
submission  of  reports  to  assist  in  rapid  response,  to
streamline  reporting  to  higher  levels  of  government,
and  to  facilitate  data  analysis.  Whereas  disposition  of
individual incidents is the first goal for reporting, there
is much to be learned from looking at the overall pic-
ture.  Keeping  information  in  an  electronic  database
simplifies the latter.
Data  should  be  reviewed  at  regular  intervals  (no
less  than  yearly)  to  determine  whether  the  incidence
and  severity  of  dog  bites  is  getting  better,  worse,  or
staying  the  same.  Basic  analysis  consists  of  studying
the characteristics of incidents, including:
'time—yearly  trends,  peak  months,  day  of  week,
time of day. This can help with scheduling animal
1738Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1738
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
control  services  as  well  as  dispatch  and  response
planning.
'place—locating  every  incident  on  a  map  with  a
pin. Are there hot spots? This can help target high
risk areas for future control.
'person—victims  and  animal  owners:  age,  sex,
race, size. Can they be targeted for education?
'dog—proportion  of  offenders  by  sex  and  breed,
proportion running at large, proportion neutered,
proportion  with  prior  reported  problems,  history
of  rabies  vaccinations,  licensing  history.  Have
these proportions changed over time?
Successful evaluation and resolution of a commu-
nity  problem  and  accurate  assimilation,  evaluation,
and use of quality data requires interactive assessment,
feedback, and information exchange. City, county, and
state  public  health  practitioners,  epidemiologists,  and
representatives  of  public  health  organizations  (eg,  the
National    Association    of    State    Public    Health
Veterinarians,  the  Council  of  State  and  Territorial
Epidemiologists,   the   Association   of   State   and
Territorial    Health    Officers,    and    the    National
Association  of  County  and  City  Health  Officials)  can
provide  communities  with  considerable  expertise  in
the  acquisition  and  interpretation  of  dog  bite  data.
Their participation should be encouraged.
Education
Education  is  key  to  reducing  dog  bites  within  a
community. The list of those to be educated and those
who  may  educate  includes  everyone  who  regularly
comes into contact with dog owners and potential vic-
tims  (eg,  veterinarians,  veterinary  technicians  and
assistants, animal control officers, animal behaviorists,
dog  trainers,  humane  society  personnel,  physicians,
school  nurses,  public  health  officials,  teachers,  and
parents).
The  purposes  of  this  section  are  to  educate  city
officials and community leaders about the role of vari-
ous professionals in an educational program to reduce
dog  bites,  provide  starting  references  to  ensure  a  core
of  knowledge  for  those  professionals  (Appendix  5),
and assist in identification of the educational needs of
various constituencies within a community. 
Public officials and community leaders
Public  officials  and  community  leaders  are  the
people  to  whom  residents  look  for  assistance  with
social problems. Their influence is important and well
recognized.  If  a  community  dog  bite  prevention  pro-
gram  is  to  gain  public  acceptance  and  be  effective,
community leaders must be well-informed about dog-
related issues within their community and in general. 
Professionals
Professionals  from  many  backgrounds  need  to  be
involved  in  bite  prevention  programs.  Their  expertise
is  essential  to  making  realistic  decisions  about  what
should and can be done to prevent or follow up on dog
bite  incidents  and  in  recognizing  what  is  normal  or
abnormal  behavior  for  a  dog.  Several  of  these  profes-
sionals will likely be members of the advisory commit-
tee, but all should be encouraged to be a part of a com-
munity’s  efforts  to  decrease  the  impact  of  a  dog  bite
problem.
Many professions mentioned in this document are
science-based.  This  means  their  members  are  used  to
making  decisions  on  the  basis  of  peer-reviewed  data-
supported  information  rather  than  gut  feelings.  This
approach to decision making results in improved out-
comes. Because the dog bite problem impacts so many
different  groups,  networking  between  community
leaders  and  professionals  is  important.  The  following
sections  describe  ways  that  various  professionals  and
community  leaders  can  work  together  toward  a  com-
mon goal.
Veterinarians—Veterinarians are scientists trained
for  a  minimum  of  7  to  8  years  and  then  licensed  to
diagnose and treat animal problems both medical and
behavioral.  Although  most  people  think  of  veterinari-
ans  as  performing  animal  vaccinations  and  surgical
neutering, the practice of veterinary medicine includes
all  subdisciplines  typically  associated  with  human
medicine.  The  study  of  animal  behavior  both  normal
and  abnormal  has  become  more  important  within  the
profession as animals have become more important to
their  owners.  Dogs  are  now  four-legged  members  of
the  family,  rather  than  farm  animals  that  help  bring
cows into the barn at milking time. With this change in
the  dog’s  role  have  come  unrealistic  owner  expecta-
tions  about  what  constitutes  normal  behavior  for  a
dog. Veterinarians can educate dog owners as to what
behavior  is  normal,  can  help  dog  owners  teach  their
dogs to respond appropriately in various environments
and provide referrals to reputable dog trainers, and can
assist  owners  with  behavioral  problems,  including
those  that  have  a  medical  basis  or  are  responsive  to
medication.
Until  recently,  animal  behavior  was  not  often
taught in veterinary curricula. Many veterinarians have
had  to  acquire  their  knowledge  of  normal  and  abnor-
mal  canine  behavior  from  continuing  education  pro-
grams and professional textbooks. For this reason, dif-
ferent  veterinarians  have  different  degrees  of  knowl-
edge  about  behavior.  All  veterinarians,  however,  have
access  to  board-certified  veterinary  behaviorists  for
help with behavioral problems beyond their expertise.
Although   the   time,   physical,   and   emotional
demands  of  veterinary  practice  can  be  overwhelming
and leave limited time to devote to a formal communi-
ty prevention program, veterinarians can substantially
impact  prevention  efforts  through  their  professional
contact with prospective and current dog owners. This
contact  should  begin  before  the  pet  is  acquired.
Providing  unbiased  information  on  pet  selection  can
help   prevent   inappropriate   owner-dog   pairings.
Prospective  dog  owners  often  make  spur-of-the-
moment  selections  that  are  based  on  warm-and-fuzzy
feelings  and  unrealistic  expectations.  Encouraging
prospective dog owners to seek information from their
veterinarian about the characteristics and needs of var-
ious types of pets and encouraging future dog owners
to ask for guarantees from puppy providers can mini-
mize  future  problems.  When  owners  take  their  newly
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1739
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1739
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
acquired dogs to their veterinarian for an initial exam-
ination and immunizations, the veterinarian has a sec-
ond  opportunity  to  provide  these  owners  with  good
medical,  nutritional,  and  behavioral  advice.
21
Finally,
veterinarians  can  educate  owners  during  their  dogs’
routine  examinations  (asking  appropriate  questions
can  reveal  problems  an  owner  may  not  have  recog-
nized)  or  when  their  dogs  are  evaluated  for  specific
problems. 
Board-certified   veterinary   behaviorists—The
American College of Veterinary Behaviorists (ACVB),
an  American  Veterinary  Medical  Association-recog-
nized veterinary specialty organization, certifies gradu-
ate veterinarians in the specialty of veterinary behavior.
To become certified, a veterinarian must have extensive
postgraduate training, sufficient experience, and pass a
credential  review  and  examination  set  by  the  ACVB.
Diplomates  of  this  organization  work  with  problem
animals by referral from the animal’s regular veterinar-
ian, consult with practitioners on cases, and give con-
tinuing   education   seminars   on   animal   behavior.
Although many communities may not have the benefit
of a resident board-certified veterinary behaviorist, vet-
erinarians  have  access  to  and  may  consult  with  their
specialist colleagues when necessary.
Veterinary  technicians—Veterinary  technicians
are integral members of the veterinary health care team
who  have  been  educated  in  the  care  and  handling  of
animals,  basic  principles  of  normal  and  abnormal  life
processes,  and  routine  laboratory  and  clinical  proce-
dures. They perform many of the same tasks for veteri-
narians that nurses and others perform for physicians.
Veterinary technicians are often frontline people when
it comes to educating pet owners, particularly in gen-
eral veterinary practices; they greet clients and answer
initial  inquiries,  clarify  instructions,  provide  clients
with  appropriate  print,  audio,  and  video  educational
material,  and  answer  questions.  Certainly,  they  are  an
important part of the educational team when it comes
to dog bite prevention.
Like  veterinarians,  veterinary  technicians  have
several  opportunities  to  educate  clients.  Veterinarians
may be consulted prior to owners acquiring a new pet,
and  veterinary  technicians  can  help  provide  informa-
tion  on  appropriate  pet  selection.  Veterinary  techni-
cians  regularly  counsel  owners  during  new  puppy
appointments, and this is a particularly good opportu-
nity  to  provide  owners  with  information  on  bite  pre-
vention, including the importance of socialization and
training.  Routine  physical  examinations  are  times
when  veterinary  technicians  can  reinforce  the  impor-
tance of these early lessons and training, and they can
help  veterinarians  identify  potential  aggression  prob-
lems  through  observation  and  dialog  with  owners.
Veterinary  technicians  can  also  be  tapped  to  educate
nonpet-owning children and adults through school or
other programs.
Veterinary  technology  programs  do  not  always
offer  curricula  in  animal  behavior  and,  consequently,
many  technicians  do  not  have  formal  training  in  this
area  when  they  enter  practice.  Continuing  education
that  includes  basic  principles  of  animal  behavior  is
essential for veterinary technicians, just as it is for their
employers.  Maintaining  a  clinic  reference  library  of
appropriate  print,  audio,  and  video  material  for  rein-
forcement  and  enrichment  and  for  client  education  is
useful.
Behavioral  education  for  veterinary  technicians
relative to dog bite prevention should include recogni-
tion of classic canine behavioral displays and an under-
standing  of  the  basic  types  of  canine  aggression  and
their  prevention.  The  aim  is  to  assist  technicians  in
conveying dog bite prevention information to owners.
Veterinary technicians must not be placed in the role of
diagnosing or treating canine aggression.
Animal behaviorists—There are a number of sci-
entists with PhD degrees in academic fields related to
animal  behavior  who  can  serve  as  valuable  resources
for   communities   attempting   to   reduce   dog   bite
injuries.  Because  of  their  science-based  backgrounds,
they can be particularly helpful in setting up protocols
to determine the extent of the problem within a com-
munity  and  whether  ongoing  programs  are  having  a
substantial impact.
As a note of caution, the terms animal behaviorist
or  animal  psychologist  are  often  used  by  individuals
who  do  not  have  strong  scientific  backgrounds  but
who  want  to  work  with  problem  dogs.  There  is  no
method to evaluate the competence of these individu-
als,  and  they  may  be  more  harmful  than  helpful  to  a
community’s efforts.
Dog trainers—This is a diverse group of individu-
als with no uniformly recognized credentialing body or
measures  of  competence.  Although  there  are  many
good dog trainers, there are also trainers that use inap-
propriate methods of behavioral modification that can
negatively affect a dog’s behavior, making the dog more
dangerous  to  the  owner  and  the  community.  It  is
important that communities make a concerted effort to
work  with  responsible  trainers  who  interact  closely
with  veterinarians  and  PhD-degreed  animal  behavior-
ists. A qualified responsible dog trainer can be a valu-
able asset to a community advisory group.
Obedience  training  by  itself  does  not  prevent  the
development of behavior problems,
22
and animals that
are sent to a training facility may not learn how to obey
their owners, because the owners do not learn how to
give commands. For problem animals, training is only
part of the solution.
Physicians and nurses—With a dog residing in 1
of  every  3  US  homes  and  approximately  53  million
dogs in the United States,
2,3,6
exposure of the physician
or  nurse,  their  family  members,  or  their  patients  to
dogs during the course of daily life is inevitable. Dogs
have  become  important  members  of  many  families,
and  the  presence  of  a  pet  in  the  home  can  affect  an
individual’s own decisions about care. Most physicians
are familiar with at least 1 example of a person refus-
ing  hospitalization,  because  there  was  no  one  else  in
the home to care for their pet. 
Because 334,000 Americans are seen in emergency
departments  for  dog  bite  injuries  each  year,  466,000
are  seen  in  other  medical  practice  settings,  and  6,000
1740Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1740
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
are   hospitalized,
6
it   behooves   human   healthcare
providers to acquaint themselves with community and
personal  strategies  to  prevent  dog  bites.  Furthermore,
just  as  occurrences  of  infectious  diseases  such  as
measles  are  reported  to  enable  investigation  of  out-
breaks and development of control measures to protect
the  public,  dog  bites  must  be  reported  so  that  cause
and  prevention  can  be  addressed.  Communities  differ
in  their  requirements  for  reporting,  and  practitioners
must understand what is required in their area.
Traditionally, when confronted with patients seek-
ing care for dog bites, physicians and nurses have con-
fined their roles to providing medical treatment. With
the expanding roles of physicians and nurses, however,
disease  prevention  has  become  an  important  issue.  In
addition  to  competently  treating  dog  bites  and  their
complications,  healthcare  providers  need  to  be  aware
of  critical  roles  they  can  play  in  reducing  dog  bite
injuries.
Advising  patients  about  safe  behaviors  appears
effective  in  preventing  injury.
23-26
Teaching  children,
parents,  and  patients  who  own  dogs  about  proper
behavior  around  dogs  and  responsible  dog  ownership
is advisable given the frequency of human-canine con-
tact in our society. Physicians can recommend contact-
ing  a  veterinarian  for  pet  selection  information  and
advice  if  an  individual  or  family  is  considering  dog
ownership, and for information about canine behavior
and  obedience  training  if  a  dog  is  already  part  of  the
family.  Pediatricians  provide  age-appropriate  injury
prevention  counseling  during  wellness  visits.
26
Dog
bite  prevention  should  be  a  part  of  this  counseling.
Dog safety tips can also be included in packets of mate-
rials routinely sent home with new mothers.
When  a  patient  is  being  treated  for  a  bite,  an
opportunity exists to prevent future injury by teaching
bite-avoidance  strategies.  Probing  into  the  circum-
stances of the current bite may reveal which strategies
should  be  emphasized.  Taking  advantage  of  teachable
moments  should  be  considered  part  of  curative  care.
Consulting with a veterinarian may help human health
care  providers  identify  subjects  they  can  address  dur-
ing postbite sessions.
As witnesses to the health-related outcomes of dog
bites,  physicians  and  nurses  are  particularly  credible
sources of information and can be effective spokesper-
sons.  Pediatricians  and  nurses  should  be  full  partners
in community efforts to reduce dog bite injuries.
Animal  control  personnel—The  staff  of  a  well-
resourced  animal  control  program  often  includes  an
education  coordinator  who  can  train  teachers,  school
nurses, and volunteers to become dog bite prevention
educators within the community’s school system (sim-
ilar to volunteers in the McGruff crime prevention pro-
gram  presented  to  primary-school  children).  For  ani-
mal  control  personnel,  job-related  continuing  educa-
tion  is  important.  Programs  are  available  through  the
National Animal Control Association.
Humane society/animal shelter/rescue group per-
sonnel—Dog bite injuries have negative repercussions
for dogs as well as people, and humane society/animal
shelter/rescue  group  personnel  must  deal  with  these
issues. Dogs causing severe injuries may be brought to
humane  facilities  for  rabies  quarantine  or  euthanasia.
Dogs that have threatened to bite or that have nipped
may be surrendered to shelters or rescue groups, some-
times without full acknowledgment by their owners.
16
Shelter personnel are forced to decide which dogs can
be placed in new homes and which are not suitable for
adoption.  Progressive  organizations  work  with  veteri-
narians  and  animal  control  officers  to  educate  their
staff about safe dog handling and objective evaluation
techniques.  Record  keeping  and  follow-up  studies
expand  their  knowledge  base  about  what  works  in
their community and what does not. Well-trained and
dedicated humane society/animal shelter/rescue group
personnel  can  be  valuable  community  resources  for
public education as well.
Public
Public  education  is  critical  to  the  success  of  any
dog  bite  prevention  program,  because  half  of  all  bites
are  inflicted  by  the  family  dog.
27
Only  about  10%  of
bites are inflicted by dogs unknown to the victim.
7,15
A
public education effort must target a variety of individ-
uals  and  age  groups,  and  one  individual  should  be
assigned to integrate its components. If a special advi-
sory council or task force is convened, its paid coordi-
nator would be a logical choice to coordinate the pub-
lic education effort. Alternatively, the public education
coordinator  could  be  a  member  of  a  municipal  group
such  as  the  local  health  department,  animal  control
agency, or board of education, or a member of a stake-
holder  group  such  as  a  humane  society  or  veterinary
association.  Many  educational  programs  targeted  at
various audiences exist and are included in the dog bite
prevention  resource  list  found  on  the  American
Veterinary      Medical      Association      Web      site
(www.avma.org).  As  new  materials  become  available,
they will be added to this resource list.
Children—Children are the most common victims
of  serious  dog  bites.  Seventy  percent  of  fatal  dog
attacks  and  more  than  half  of  bite  wounds  requiring
medical  attention  involve  children.
7,9,15
In  addition,
almost half of all children are bitten before 18 years of
age.
27,28
The  most  vulnerable  youngsters  are  5-  to  9-
year-old boys,
6,7,8
but smaller children can also be seri-
ously  injured.
29
Dog  bite  injuries  rank  third  only  to
bicycle and baseball/softball injuries as a leading cause
of  emergency  admission  of  children  to  hospitals.
6
Children’s   natural   behaviors,   including   running,
yelling,  grabbing,  hitting,  quick  and  darting  move-
ments,  and  maintaining  eye  contact,  put  them  at  risk
for dog bite injuries. Proximity of a child’s face to the
dog  also  increases  the  likelihood  that  facial  injuries
will occur.
6,7,29-31
Target  group—The  first  step  in  a  child  education
effort  is  determining  what  population  of  children  to
target and when. The logical primary audience is those
at  greatest  risk:  children  in  grades  kindergarten
through  4.  Late  winter  or  early  spring  appears  to  be
the  best  time  to  institute  a  campaign,  because  the
school year is concluding and, as children spend more
time  outside,  exposure  risk  increases.
32
It  is  critical
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1741
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1741
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
that  school  administrators  buy  into  the  concept  of  a
dog bite prevention program; therefore, requests to the
school  district  must  be  made  by  committed  convinc-
ing well-organized individuals. Because school curric-
ula  are  crowded,  time  blocks  for  dog  bite  prevention
education should be requested early within the school
system’s  calendar  year.  If  such  a  block  of  time  is  not
available,  an  alternative  is  to  have  a  veterinarian  or
physician  present  a  1-hour  lecture  or  assembly  pro-
gram  to  the  entire  student  body.  Once  dog  bite  pre-
vention  education  has  been  included  within  the  cur-
riculum  (or  has  been  scheduled  to  be  provided
through a special lecture or assembly program), teach-
ers, nurses, and volunteers should consider addressing
the school’s parent-teacher organization to inform par-
ents  of  upcoming  dog  bite  prevention  training  for
their children. 
Secondary  efforts—Secondary  targets  include  chil-
dren  in  other  settings,  such  as  early  education  pro-
grams  (eg,  Head  Start,  day  care  centers,  recreational
centers, and camps). 
Identifying  instructors—Who  teaches  the  material
will  depend  on  expertise  within  the  community.  For
classroom  instruction,  teachers  who  have  had  in-ser-
vice training, school nursing staff, health educators, or
trained  volunteers  are  logical  choices.  Stakeholder
groups  (eg,  veterinarians,  veterinary  technicians,  ani-
mal control officers, physicians, nurses, humane soci-
ety staff) may provide a ready source of volunteers for
classroom instruction and special programs.
Adults—Adult citizens must understand the need
for and support a strong dog bite prevention program
not only for their own safety but for the safety of oth-
ers  in  their  community.  It  is  this  understanding  that
gives  a  prevention  program  long-term  stability.  All
adults should learn appropriate behaviors around dogs
so  that  they  can  protect  themselves,  teach  their  own
children, serve as an example for others, and reinforce
appropriate behaviors in other children at every oppor-
tunity. Adults also serve as local eyes for animal control
so that roaming dogs are controlled. 
Educational materials sent home with school chil-
dren,  distributed  by  pediatricians  during  well-child
visits, inserted in public utility bills, and produced by
an enlightened local media are all reasonable approach-
es.  Involving  representatives  of  service  organizations
and community groups during a prevention program’s
planning  and  active  stages  will  strengthen  commit-
ment.
Active  adults  (eg,  joggers,  bicyclists,  golfers)
whose  outdoor  activities  provide  greater  exposure  to
dogs are most at risk for injury. To reach these individ-
uals,  bite  prevention  information  should  be  provided
to  local  interest  groups,  recreational  facilities,  and
health clubs.
Target  group—Primary  adult  targets  within  the
community  are  those  who  have  children  and  who  are
active in outdoor activities.
Secondary efforts—Secondary targets include indi-
viduals between the ages of 21 and 65 years.
Identifying instructors—Materials can be developed
or selected by animal control personnel, veterinarians,
veterinary technicians, or other people knowledgeable
about  dog  behavior.  Information  can  be  distributed
through a number of channels such as those identified
above.
The  elderly—As  people  age,  they  become  more
susceptible  to  injury  and  disease.  Thinning  skin
increases risk of bruising, and a bite producing a sim-
ple puncture wound in a younger individual can cause
a severe laceration in a senior citizen. Sensory percep-
tion decreases so that an elderly person may not see a
threatening  dog  or  may  not  be  able  to  read  its  behav-
ioral signals accurately. In addition, diminished motor
skills  mean  that  the  elderly  are  less  able  to  physically
protect themselves or escape.
Another  concern  for  the  elderly  is  that  their
beloved  pet  may  not  be  trustworthy  around  their
grandchildren.  Dogs  not  raised  around  small  children
or  not  frequently  exposed  to  them  may  not  be  social-
ized  toward  them.
1
This  increases  the  likelihood  of
aggressive  behavior  being  directed  toward  these  chil-
dren.
An educational program for senior citizens can be
implemented in various settings. Materials may be pro-
vided through community services for the elderly such
as  church  groups,  visiting  nurse  programs,  meals-on-
wheels,   recreational   centers,   or   travel   groups.
Secondary  targets  are  shopping  malls  and  the  media.
Trained volunteers, especially from dog-associated pro-
fessions,  are  logical  sources  of  information.  Human
healthcare professionals can be an important source of
information for the elderly because of the frequency of
their interactions.
Target  group—Primary  targets  are  grandparents
and  people  aged  60  years  or  older  who  have  dogs  in
their homes.
Secondary efforts—Secondary targets include other
individuals who are at least 60 years old.
Identifying  instructors—Physicians  can  interact
with  these  people  during  clinic  visits.  Animal  control
personnel,  veterinarians,  veterinary  technicians,  and
people knowledgeable about dog behavior can select or
produce resource information.
Animal  owners—People  who  own  dogs  have  a
wide  variety  of  views  about  their  responsibilities.  For
some, dog care means providing food and water when
the  thought  occurs  to  them.  At  the  other  end  of  this
spectrum is the person who actively makes sure the pet
is appropriately fed, well-trained, licensed, and healthy.
Some  individuals  view  dogs  as  disposable  items  that
can  be  abandoned  at  any  sign  of  trouble  or  expense.
Once a community establishes acceptable standards for
responsible ownership, dog owners must be informed
of these expectations and related ordinances, and rules
must be enforced. Owners and future owners must be
educated  about  their  unique  set  of  responsibilities,
which  include  appropriate  pet  selection,  providing
quality  nutrition,  housing,  and  medical  care,  compli-
ance  with  confinement  and  licensing  requirements,
1742Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1742
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
appropriate  behavioral  training,  and  supervision  of
interactions between dogs and children. Citizens must
understand that pet ownership is an ongoing responsi-
bility, not a passive activity.
Dog  owners  can  be  provided  with  information
through  various  avenues.  Veterinarians  and  their  staff
are logical educators and distributors. Local dog clubs
and  trainers  provide  services  to  more  conscientious
owners.  Businesses  that  sell  pet  foods  and  supplies
should  also  be  encouraged  to  provide  bite  prevention
materials  to  their  customers.  Information  can  be  dis-
tributed with utility bills, and animal shelters can pro-
vide classes for people who are considering acquiring a
pet. Incentives for attendance at bite prevention class-
es could include reduced fees for licenses and coupons
for vaccinations, food, and obedience classes. The most
difficult  group  of  dog  owners  to  reach  is  those  with
minimal  attachment  to  their  pets.  Although  strong
enforcement  of  local  regulations  will  change  some
owners into former owners, most will continue to own
dogs.  Therefore,  education  should  be  an  integral  part
of any enforcement program. A good working relation-
ship  with  the  judiciary  is  critical  so  that  offenders  of
animal-related ordinances are required to take courses
that emphasize responsible ownership.
Target  group—Primary  targets  are  adults  who
already own dogs.
Secondary  efforts—Secondary  targets  are  adults
who are considering getting a new dog.
Identifying instructors—Information for this target
audience can come from various sources, and its distri-
bution  should  be  approached  in  a  number  of  ways.
Animal control officers and members of the legal pro-
fession  can  describe  what  is  expected  regarding  local
regulations and the serious consequences if these reg-
ulations  are  violated.  Veterinarians  and  their  staff  can
educate   owners   about   vaccinations,   neutering,
restraint, and other health care issues. Dog club mem-
bers  and  trainers  can  assist  by  providing  socialization
and training instruction and can help educate owners
about being good dog-owning neighbors.
Victims—When someone becomes a dog bite vic-
tim,  a  teachable  moment  is  created.  How  useful  that
moment  becomes  in  preventing  future  incidents
depends  tremendously  on  the  seriousness  of  the  bite
and the fear response of the victim. Scare-producing or
threatening events are good times for dog bite preven-
tion  information  to  be  conveyed.  However,  the  time
surrounding a serious injury is generally too emotion-
ally charged to be of value for dog bite prevention edu-
cation. 
Who provides information to victims depends, in
part, on who is contacted about the incident. In addi-
tion  to  medical  personnel,  animal  control’s  investiga-
tive efforts usually require a home visit. Routine visits
to  a  physician  should  include  gathering  historical
information about the patient’s interactions with dogs
to identify patients who would benefit from additional
education.   Media   stories   that   reinforce   correct
approaches  to  prevention  can  also  touch  many  when
they are most receptive.
Target group—Individuals who have recently been
bitten  by  a  dog  seriously  enough  to  require  medical
attention  but  not  so  seriously  as  to  have  sustained
severe injuries are the primary target.
Secondary efforts—Secondary targets are individu-
als who have been bitten by a dog in the past.
Identifying  instructors—Medical  professionals  and
animal  control  personnel  are  the  individuals  who
encounter this group.
Businesses—Community   businesses   need   to
address dog bite prevention as well. Certain businesses
(eg,  veterinary  clinics,  grooming  and  boarding  facili-
ties,  animal  control,  pet  sitting  agencies)  revolve
around direct contact with dogs, and employee educa-
tion  is  critical  from  a  safety  and  liability  standpoint.
Employees   of   other   businesses   will   occasionally
encounter dogs in the course of their daily job activi-
ties (eg, utility workers, police officers, parcel carriers,
and  emergency  medical  technicians).  Training  con-
ducted  by  an  animal  control  officer  or  other  knowl-
edgeable professional may provide employees with the
tools they need to safely handle contacts with at-large
animals, attack/guard dogs, or dogs who simply reside
on the premises of those facilities where they do busi-
ness.
Target  group—Primary  targets  are  employees  and
business  owners  who  will  be  working  with  dogs  on  a
daily basis.
Secondary  efforts—Employees  of  companies  who
are  likely  to  encounter  dogs  in  their  daily  business
activities can be considered secondary targets.
Identifying  instructors—Animal  control  personnel,
veterinarians,  veterinary  technicians,  and  dog  trainers
who are experienced at dealing with dogs in a variety
of  environments.  These  individuals  will  need  to  cus-
tomize  presentations  to  the  type  of  situations  most
likely encountered by the target audiences.
Media
The local media play an important role in a com-
munity’s efforts at bite prevention. For this reason, it is
suggested  that  1  member  of  the  advisory  council  or
task  force  be  a  media  representative.  In  addition,  the
advisory council can be proactive in helping the media
convey    important    and    appropriate    messages.
Sensational  events  provide  an  opportunity  to  convey
important  messages.  Regular  features  can  reinforce
principles and keep educational efforts flowing.
Know the media
Your key to the public eye and ear is a selective up-
to-date list of local media contacts who have an inter-
est  in  animal  issues.  Such  a  list  can  be  developed  by
undertaking a comprehensive media survey. Check the
local library for publications that list names, telephone
numbers,  and  short  descriptions  of  your  community’s
media  outlets.  Call  each  office  or  studio  to  discover
which  desks  or  departments  should  receive  your
inquiries and press releases. Read local newspapers and
listen  to  local  radio  and  television  news  and  feature
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1743
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1743
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
programs  to  identify  reporters  and  hosts  who  address
animal  issues.  Finding  out  whether  these  individuals
gather  their  own  news  or  use  wire  services  will  allow
you to target press releases and materials to those who
are  most  likely  to  use  them.  Contact  local  freelance
writers to see whether they would be willing to feature
a  bite  prevention  message  in  an  upcoming  piece.  Be
aware  that  your  media  list  will  be  dynamic,  and  take
time to update the names of specific contacts. Once a
helpful  story  is  published,  or  a  reporter  conveys  your
message  during  a  broadcast,  be  sure  to  acknowledge
that  effort  by  sending  a  thank-you  note  or  making  an
appreciative telephone call.
A spokesperson
The  community  should  identify  a  spokesperson
who has the expertise to address complicated dog bite-
related  issues,  and  this  individual  should  be  provided
with media training so that he/she becomes an effective
communicator with the print and broadcast media. It is
the spokesperson’s responsibility to convey information
clearly,  accurately,  and  promptly.  In  various  situations,
this individual can identify when there are not enough
animal control officers to prevent dog packs from form-
ing  or  when  a  dog  has  been  “sicced”  on  a  person  as  a
weapon. A knowledgeable and effective communicator
can  turn  a  publicized  bite  into  a  learning  opportunity
by  providing  suggestions  on  how  that  bite  could  have
been prevented (eg, the dog was not appropriately con-
trolled or confined, or a child was left unsupervised).
Have information readily available
The advisory council or task force should create a
1-page  fact  sheet  for  use  by  the  media  and  the
spokesperson. This fact sheet should include the num-
ber  of  dog  bite  incidents  occurring  in  the  community
during  the  past  year,  the  number  of  dogs  in  the  com-
munity, the number of licensed dogs in the communi-
ty, what local laws govern dog ownership and control,
and  to  whom  problems  should  be  reported.  A  list  of
community resources should also be available.
Ways to effectively convey information
Because animal stories are popular with the media,
there  are  numerous  opportunities  to  convey  bite  pre-
vention  information.  Local  broadcast  programs  and
newspapers find regular segments about animals pop-
ular  with  viewers/listeners/readers,  and  most  of  those
spots  have  enough  time  for  short  lessons.  Another
approach  is  to  proactively  bring  animal  stories  to  the
media.  Examples  include  a  story  about  a  shelter  dog
that  visits  nursing  homes  after  being  rescued  and
appropriately  trained,  a  description  of  a  guide  or
“hero”  dog’s  training,  or  warm-weather  tips  for  pets.
Effective  mechanisms  for  providing  information  vary
with the medium but include:
News  releases—Releases  may  be  provided  to
print,  radio,  or  television  outlets.  Releases  should  be
double-space  typed  on  stationery  that  provides  the
source  of  the  announcement  (ie,  the  advisory  council
or task force). Include the subject of the news release
and  contact  information  in  the  upper  left  corner.  The
mailing  date  of  the  release  should  be  indicated  along
the  right  margin.  The  release  should  be  written  in
inverted  pyramid  style,  placing  the  most  important
information at the beginning. Releases should be limit-
ed to 1 page if possible.
Interviews—Interviews  may  be  conducted  by
print, radio, or television reporters or hosts and, in the
case of television and radio, may be live or taped. The
individual being interviewed must be an excellent com-
municator and intimately familiar with dog bite issues
and  prevention.  The  interviewee  may  request  a  prein-
terview to get a grasp of the direction of the interview.
It  is  advisable  to  tell  the  interviewer  which  issues  you
would definitely like to see addressed. Answers should
be structured according to the program’s time limits. 
Talk shows—Most of the principles that apply to
interviews  also  apply  to  talk  shows,  but  in  this  situa-
tion there usually will be interaction with guests (who
often  hold  opposing  views),  potentially  with  an  audi-
ence,  and  with  the  host.  Running  through  mock  dis-
cussions prior to participation is helpful. Responses to
questions  or  comments  from  those  with  opposing
views should always be factual, sincere, and polite.
Public affairs programs—Many stations air 2 or 3
programs  a  week  in  which  the  station’s  news  staff  or
station   management   interview   a   newsmaker,   a
spokesperson from an activist group, or a public rela-
tions  representative  from  an  industry.  Issues  in  the
news are often addressed by such programming. These
provide a good opportunity to make your community
aware  of  bite  prevention  efforts  and  to  elicit  support.
Access to these programs may be requested by sending
a letter to the station manager.
Bulletin board and community announcements—
Many  local  television  stations  donate  air  time  to
announcements of community events. These are often
broadcast  in  calendar  format.  This  is  an  easy  way  to
publicize educational events and responsible pet own-
ership classes.
Editorials—Editorials  are  used  by  print,  radio,
and television reporters to present their views on issues
of  public  interest.  Prepared  statements  describing  the
advisory council’s approach to dog bite prevention can
be provided to reporters for use in preparing an edito-
rial or may be provided if a reporter presents an oppos-
ing viewpoint.
Public  service  announcements—Many  radio  and
television  stations  donate  time  for  public  service
announcements  (PSA);  however,  public  service  groups
cannot specify when your PSA is to be aired. It is accept-
able to suggest when you believe airing your PSA will be
most  effective.  Most  PSAs  run  for  30  to  60  seconds,
although 10- and 20-second spots are also used. To mit-
igate  the  costs  associated  with  production,  you  may
want to contact local stations to see whether they offer
sponsored placements, in which local advertisers donate
time for specific public service messages. Public service
announcements  may  consist  of  script  only,  sight  and
sound (simple or complex), or 16-mm film or videotape.
1744Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1744
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1745
a
See www.avma.org for additional and updated information.
b
Anderson  RD,  Nevada  Department  of  Public  Health,  Reno,  Nev:
Personal communication, 1999.
c
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Resource guide-
line for state and local injury control programs; in preparation.
References
1.  Beaver  BV.  Canine  behavior:  a  guide  for  veterinarians.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co, 1999.
2.  Wise JK, Yang JJ. Dog and cat ownership, 1991–1998. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 1994;204:1166–1167.
3.  Center for Information Management. US pet ownership and
demographics  sourcebook.  Schaumburg,  Ill:  American  Veterinary
Medical Association, 1997.
4.  Sacks JJ, Kresnow M, Houston B. Dog bites: how big a prob-
lem? Inj Prev1996;2:52–54.
5.  Quinlan KP, Sacks JJ. Hospitalizations for dog bite injuries.
JAMA1999;281:232–233.
6.   Weiss  HB,  Friedman  DI,  Coben  JH.  Incidence  of  dog  bite
injuries treated in emergency departments. JAMA1998;2711:51–53.
7.   Wright  JC.  Canine  aggression  toward  people:  bite  scenarios
and prevention. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract1991;21:299–314.
8.  Parrish HM, Clack FB, Brobst D, et al. Epidemiology of dog
bites. Public Health Rep1959;74:891–903.
9.  Sacks  JJ,  Sattin  RW,  Bonzo  SE.  Dog  bite-related  fatalities
from 1979 through 1988. JAMA1989;262:1489–1492.
10.  Sacks JJ, Lockwood R, Hornreich J, et al. Fatal dog attacks,
1989-1994. Pediatrics1996;97:891–895.
11.   Beaver  BV.  Human-canine  interactions:  a  summary  of  per-
spectives. J Am Vet Med Assoc1997;210:1148–1150.
12.  Lockwood R. Vicious dogs: communities, humane societies,
and  owners  struggle  with  a  growing  problem.  Comm  Anim  Control
1996;Mar/Apr:12–14.
13.  Podberscek AL. Dog on a tightrope: the position of the dog
in British society as influenced by press reports on dog attacks (1988
to 1992). Anthrozoös1994;7:232–241.
14.  Sacks JJ, Sinclair L, Gilchrist J, et al. Breeds of dogs involved
in fatal attacks in the United States between 1979 and 1998. J Am Vet
Med Assoc2000;217:836–840.
15.  Gershman  KA,  Sacks  JJ,  Wright  JC.  Which  dogs  bite?  A
case-control study of risk factors. Pediatrics1994;93:913–917.
16.  Line SW. Factors associated with surrender of animals to an
urban  humane  society,  in  Proceedings.  135th  AVMA  Annu  Conv,
1998;345–348.
17.   Mays  J.  How  many  ACOs  should  you  have?  NACA  News
1998;Jan/Feb:27.
18. American   Humane   Association,   American   Veterinary
Medical  Association,  The  Humane  Society  of  the  United  States,  Pet
Food Institute. Model dog and cat control ordinance.Schaumburg, Ill:
American Veterinary Medical Association, 1976. 
19.   National  Association  of  State  Public  Health  Veterinarians.
Compendium  of  animal  rabies  control. J  Am  Vet  Med  Assoc1999;
214:198–202.
20.   Marmer  L.  The  new  breed  of  municipal  dog  control  laws:
are  they  constitutional?  University  of  Cincinnati  Law  Review
1984;53:1067–1081.
21.  Hart  BL.  Selecting,  raising,  and  caring  for  dogs  to  avoid
problem aggression. J Am Vet Med Assoc1997;210:1129–1134.
22.  Voith VL, Wright JC, Danneman PJ. Is there a relationship
between canine behavior problems and spoiling activities, anthropo-
morphism,  and  obedience  training?  Appl  Anim  Behav  Sci1992;34:
263–272.
23.  Quinlan KP, Sacks JJ, Kresnow M. Exposure to and compli-
ance  with  pediatric  injury  prevention  counseling—United  States,
1994. Pediatrics1998;102:E55.
24.  Miller  TR,  Galbraith  M.  Injury  prevention  counseling  by
pediatricians: a benefit-cost comparison. Pediatrics
1995;96:1–4.
25.  Bass JL, Christoffel KK, Widome M, et al. Childhood injury
prevention  counseling  in  primary  care  settings:  a  critical  review  of
the literature. Pediatrics1993;92:544–550.
26.  Committee  on  Injury  and  Poison  Prevention,  American
Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Office-based  counseling  for  injury  preven-
tion. Pediatrics1994;94:566–567.
27.  Jones  BA,  Beck  AM.  Unreported  dog  bites  and  attitudes
towards dogs. In: Anderson RK, Hart BL, Hart LA, eds. The pet con-
nection:  its  influence  on  our  health  and  quality  of  life.  Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota, 1984;355–363.
28.  Beck  AM,  Jones  BA.  Unreported  dog  bites  in  children.
Public Health Rep1985;100:315–321.
29.  Thompson, PG. The public health impact of dog attacks in
a major Australian city. Med J Aust [serial online] 1997;167:129–132.
Available at: http://www.mja.com.au. Accessed April 24, 2000.
30.  Wright JC. Severe attacks by dogs: characteristics of the dogs,
the victims, and the attack settings. Public Health Rep1985;100:55–61.
31.  Karlson TA. The incidence of facial injuries from dog bites.
JAMA1984;251:3265–3267.
32.  Harris D, Imperato PJ, Oken B. Dog bites—an unrecognized
epidemic. N Y Acad Med Bull1974;50:981–1000.
33.  American Animal Hospital Association. Owner education is
key to preventing pet behavior problems. Paw Prints1995;Spring.
34.   Arkow  P.  Animal  control  laws  and  enforcement.  J  Am  Vet
Med Assoc1991;198:1164–1172. 
35.  Borchelt PL, Lockwood R, Beck AM, et al. Attacks by packs
of  dogs  involving  predation  on  human  beings.  Public  Health  Rep
1983;98:57–66.
36.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dog-bite relat-
ed fatalities United States, 1995-1996. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
1997;46:463–467.
37.   Hannah  HW.  Municipal  animal  control  ordinances—some
legal issues. J Am Vet Med Assoc1998;213:38–39.
38.   Hannah  HW.  Legal  issues  involved  in  the  control  of  dan-
gerous dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc1994;204:735–736.
39. Hannah  HW.  Dog-bite  statutes.  J  Am  Vet  Med  Assoc
1989;195:908–909.
40.  Hannah HW. Veterinarians, dog bite statutes, and liability. J
Am Vet Med Assoc1981;179:662–663.
41.  Lauer  EA,  White  WC,  Lauer  BA.  Dog  bites:  a  neglected
problem in accident prevention. Am J Dis Child1982;136:202–204.
42.  Lockwood R, Rindy K. Are “pit bulls” different? An analy-
sis of the pit bull terrier controversy. Anthrozoös1987;1:2–8.
43.  Moss SP, Wright JC. The effects of dog ownership on judg-
ments of dog bite likelihood. Anthrozoös1987;1(2):95–99.
44.   Podberscek  AL,  Blackshaw  JK.  Dog  bites:  why,  when  and
where? Aust Vet Pract1990;20:182–186.
45.  AVMA animal welfare forum: human-canine interactions. J
Am Vet Med Assoc1997;210:1121–1154.
46.  Segan  DJ.  When  the  dog  bites:  strategies  for  emergency
management. The Physician and Sportsmedicine1994;22:67–69.
47.  Sosin DM, Sacks JJ, Sattin RW. Causes of nonfatal injuries in
the United States, 1986. Accid Anal Prev1992;24:685–687.
48.  American Veterinary Medical Association. Zoonosis updates
from  the  Journal  of  the  American  Veterinary  Medical  Association.
Schaumburg, Ill: American Veterinary Medical Association, 1995.
49.  AVMA Committee on the Human-Animal Bond. The veteri-
narian’s  way  of  selecting  a  proper  pet.  Schaumburg,  Ill:  American
Veterinary Medical Association, 1986.
50.   American  Veterinary  Medical  Association.  Dangerous  ani-
mal legislation (position statement). 2001 AVMA membership directo-
ry and resource manual, 2000:86.
51.   Beaver  BV.  Profiles  of  dogs  presented  for  aggression.  J  Am
Anim Hosp Assoc1993;29:564–569.
52.   Borchelt  PL.  Aggressive  behavior  of  dogs  kept  as  compan-
ion  animals:  classification  and  influence  of  sex,  reproductive  status
and breed. Appl Anim Ethol1983;10:45–61.
53.  Hart BL, Hart LA. Selecting pet dogs on the basis of cluster
analysis  of  breed  behavior  profiles  and  gender.  J  Am  Vet  Med  Assoc
1985;186:1181–1185.
54.  Hart BL, Miller MF. Behavioral profiles of dog breeds. J Am
Vet Med Assoc1985;186:1175–1180.
55.  Hopkins SG, Schubert TA, Hart BL. Castration of adult male
dogs: effects on roaming, aggression, urine marking, and mounting.
J Am Vet Med Assoc1976;168:1108–1110.
56.  Horwitz  D.  Pet  misbehavior:  the  human-animal  bond  at
risk. Adv Small Anim Med Surg1998;11:1–3.
57.  Landsberg GM. The distribution of canine behavior cases at
three behavior referral practices. Vet Med1991;Oct:1011–1018.
58.  Landsberg  B,  Hunthausen  W,  Ackerman  L.  Handbook  of
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1745
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
1746Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
behaviour  problems  of  the  dog  and  cat.  Boston:  Butterworth-
Heinemann, 1997;129–150.
59.  Lund JD, Vestergaard KS. Development of social behaviour in
four litters of dogs (Canis familiaris). Acta Vet Scand1998;39:183–193.
60.  Mathews JR, Lattal KA. A behavioral analysis of dog bites to
children. Dev Behav Ped1994;15:44–52.
61.   Neilson  JC,  Eckstein  RA,  Hart  BL.  Effects  of  castration  on
problem behaviors in male dogs with reference to age and duration
of behavior. J Am Vet Med Assoc1997;211:180–182.
62.  Netto WJ, Planta DJU. Behavioural testing for aggression in
the domestic dog. Appl Anim Behav Sci1997;52:243–263.
63.  O’Farrell  V,  Peachey  E.  Behavioural  effects  of  ovariohys-
terectomy on bitches. J Small Anim Pract 1990;31:595–598.
64.   Overall  K.  When  dogs  bite:  what  you  don’t  know  can  kill
dogs. DVM Newsmagazine1998;Apr:13S–20S.
65.  Overall  K.  Clinical behavioral medicine for small animals. St
Louis: Mosby, 1997;88–137.
66.  Overall KA. Sex and aggression. Canine Pract1996;20:16–18.
67.   Overall  K.  Fearful  aggression,  anxiety  case  leads  to  inten-
sive behavior modification protocol. DVM Newsmagazine1995;May:
6S–10S.
68.   Overall  KL.  Early  intervention  by  owner  can  help  prevent
inappropriate play aggression. DVM Newsmagazine1993;26(9):43.
69.   Reisner  IR,  Erb  HN,  Houpt  KA.  Risk  factors  for  behavior-
related  euthanasia  among  dominant-aggressive  dogs:  110  cases
(1989–1992) J Am Vet Med Assoc1994;205:855–863.
70.  Tan JS. Human zoonotic infections transmitted by dogs and
cats. Arch Intern Med1997;157:1933–1943.
71.  Underman AE. Bite wounds inflicted by dogs and cats. Ve t
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract1987;17:195–207.
72.  Wright JC. Canine aggression: dog bites to people. In: Voith
VL, Borchelt PL, eds. Readings in companion animal behavior.Trenton,
NJ: Veterinary Learning Systems, 1996:240–246.
73.  Zoonotic  diseases  in  the  immunocompromised:  roles  of
physicians and veterinarians. Am Assoc Food Hyg Veterinarians News-
O-Gram1998;Nov/Dec:14–15.
74.   American  Veterinary  Medical  Association.  People  and  ani-
mals  sharing  the  world.Schaumburg,  Ill:  American  Veterinary
Medical Association, 1993.
75.  Fleisher GR. The management of bite wounds. N Engl J Med
1999;340:138–140.
76.  Talan   DA,   Citron   DM,   Abrahamian   FM,   et   al.
Bacteriologic analysis of infected dog and cat bites. N Engl J Med
1999;340:85-92.
Appendix 1
Groups potentially involved in dog bite prevention
A  model  program  for  preventing  dog  bites  begins  with  assembling  a  local
coalition.  Wide  representation  of  community  views  on  the  coalition  helps
ensure sufficient input and community acceptance of the program. Key play-
ers include:
'animal control officials
'attorneys, judges
'business  sector  (eg,  local  business  leaders,  insurance  companies,  pet
stores)
'dog breeders and trainers
'educational system (eg, schools, parent-teacher organizations)
'health departments and public health associations
'humane societies
'human healthcare providers and associations (eg, nurses, pediatricians,
community health centers, emergency medical service and ambulance
companies, health maintenance organizations, hospitals, managed care
organizations,  medical  associations,  medical  examiners’  and  coroners’
offices, schools of medicine and public health, trauma centers)
'kennel clubs, dog clubs, assistance dog organizations
'law enforcement agencies
'local government officials
'media
'occupational  safety  organizations,  agencies,  and  groups  (eg,  firefight-
ers, meter readers)
'veterinary care providers and associations, allied staff, clinics, schools
of veterinary medicine and veterinary technology
'volunteer nonprofit organizations (eg, boy/girl scouts; various “Y”s; 4-H
clubs;  chapters  of  the  American  Red  Cross,  Safe  Kids,  National  Safety
Council,  and  National  Fire  Protection  Association;  foundations;  United
Way; and civic groups [Kiwanis, Rotary])
'other  groups  (eg,  sports  recreation  clubs  [joggers,  bicyclists],  automo-
bile clubs, extension offices)
Continued on next page.
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1746
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1747
Appendix 2
Model dog and cat control ordinance
Originally produced and published jointly by the American Veterinary Medical Association, the
American  Humane  Association,  the  Humane  Society  of  the  United  States,  and  the  Pet  Food
Institute in 1976. Modifications have been made from the original version to reflect updated US
Public  Laws,  current  titles  of  other  referenced  documents,  and  present  favored  terminology
and definitions concerning “dangerous” animals.
Section 1. Definitions
As used in this ordinance the following terms mean:
Animal—For the purpose of this ordinance, animal shall mean dog or cat.
Animal control authority—The person or persons designated to enforce this ordinance.
Animal establishment—Any pet shop, grooming shop, animal auction, performing-animal exhibi-
tion,  kennel  or  animal  shelter,  except  this  term  shall  not  include  veterinary  medical  facilities,
licensed  research  facilities,  facilities  operated  by  government  agencies,  or  licensed  animal
dealers regulated by the USDA under the provisions of US Public Laws 89-544, 91-579, 94-279,
99-198, and 101-624.
Animal  shelter—Facility  designated  or  recognized  by  the  [jurisdiction]*  for  the  purpose  of
impounding and caring for animals.
At large—A dog or cat shall be deemed to be at large when off the property of the owner and not
under restraint.
Humane manner—Care of an animal to include, but not be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation
and sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water, consistent with the normal requirements and
feedings habits of the animal’s size, species, and breed.
Kennel—An establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, or boarding dogs or cats or
engaged in training dogs or cats.
Licensing authority—The agency or department of [jurisdiction] or any designated representative
thereof  charged  with  administering  the  issuance  and/or  revocation  of  permits  and  licenses
under the provisions of this ordinance.
Livestock guarding dogs—Dogs kept for the primary purpose of protecting livestock from preda-
tory attacks.
Neutered—Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction.
Nuisance—A dog or cat shall be considered a nuisance if it: damages, soils, defiles, or defecates
on private property other than the owner’s or on public walks and recreation areas unless such
waste  is  immediately  removed  and  properly  disposed  of  by  the  owner;  causes  unsanitary,
“dangerous,”  or  offensive  conditions;  causes  a  disturbance  by  excessive  barking  or  other
noise  making;  or  chases  vehicles,  or  molests,  attacks,  or  interferes  with  persons  or  other
domestic animals on public property.
Owner—A person having the right of property or custody of a dog or cat or who keeps or harbors
a dog or cat or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
Person—Any  individual,  corporation,  partnership,  organization,  or  institution  commonly  recog-
nized by law as a unit.
Pet shop—An establishment engaged in the business of buying or selling, at retail, dogs or cats
or other animals for profit-making purposes.
Restraint—A dog or cat shall be considered under restraint if it is within the real property limits
of  its owner or secured by a leash or lead or under the control of a responsible person.
“Dangerous” dog or cat—A dog or cat that without justification attacks a person or domestic ani-
mal causing physical injury or death, or behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses an unjustified imminent threat or serious injury or death to one (1) or  more per-
sons or domestic animals.
Section 2. Licensing and rabies vaccination
a. Except as provided in Section 3, no person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog or cat over
four  (4)  months  of  age  within  [jurisdiction]  unless  such  dog  or  cat  is  vaccinated  and
licensed.  The  provisions  of  this  section  do  not  apply  to  animals  owned  by  a  licensed
research facility or held in a veterinary medical facility or government operated or licensed
animal shelter.
b.  All  dogs  and  cats  shall  be  vaccinated  against  rabies  by  a  licensed  veterinarian,  in  accor-
dance with the latest “Compendium of Animal Rabies Prevention and Control” authored by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians and published annually in the
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association.
c. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form
recommended by the Compendium. Each owner shall also receive a durable vaccination tag
indicating the year in which it was issued.†
d.  Application  for  a  license  must  be  made  within  thirty  (30)  days  after  obtaining  a  dog  or  cat
over 4 months of age, except that this requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a
dog or cat with the [jurisdiction] for no longer than sixty (60) days.
Written application for a dog or cat license shall be made to the [licensing authority] and
shall include the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, color, age, and sex
of the dog or cat. Applicants also shall pay the prescribed licensing fee and provide proof of
current rabies vaccination.
e. The licensing period shall be for ‡ year(s). License renewal may be applied for within sixty
(60) days prior to the expiration date. New residents must apply for a license within thirty (30)
days of establishing residence.
f.A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $____ for each unneutered dog or cat and
$____ for each neutered dog or cat.§ Persons who fail to obtain a license as required with-
in the time period specified in this section will be subjected to a delinquent fee of $____ .
g.License fees shall be waived for dogs serving the blind or deaf or government-owned dogs
used for law enforcement. All other licensing provisions shall apply.
h.Upon  acceptance  of  the  license  application  and  fee,  the  [licensing  authority]  shall  issue  a
durable license tag including an identifying number, year of issuance, city, county, and state.
Both rabies and license tags must be attached to the collar of the dog or cat.II Tags must be
worn at all times and are not transferable. [Licensing authority] shall maintain a record of all
licenses issued, and such records shall be available to the [animal control authority].
Section 3. Permits
a.No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit in compli-
ance with this section
b.The permit period shall begin with the first day of the fiscal year and shall run for one (1) year.
Renewal applications for permits may be made within sixty (60) days prior to the expiration
date.  Application  for  a  permit  to  establish  a  new  breeding  animal  establishment  under  the
provisions of this ordinance may be made at any time.
c.Annual permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee:
i.   For each kennel authorized to house less than six (6) dogs or cats$ ____ 
ii.  For each kennel authorized to house six (6) but not more than 
forty-nine (49) dogs or cats $ ____
iii. For each kennel authorized to house fifty (50) or more dogs and cats   $ ____
iv. For each pet shop$ ____
v.  For other animal establishments$ ____
d.A person who maintains a kennel of six (6) or more dogs or cats for breeding purposes may
pay an annual permit fee or may elect to license individual dogs or cats as provided under 
Section  2.  Every  facility  regulated  by  this  ordinance  shall  be  considered  a  separate  enter-
prise, requiring an individual permit.
e.Under the provisions of this ordinance, no permit fee shall be required of any animal shelter.
All other provisions shall apply. Any change in the category under which a permit is issued
shall be reported to the [licensing authority] within sixty (60) days, whereupon reclassifica-
tion and appropriate adjustment of the permit fee shall be made.
f.Failure to comply with the provisions of this section is subject to a fine of $____.
Section 4. Issuance and revocation of permits and licenses
a.The [appropriate authority] may revoke any permit or license if the person holding the per-
mit or license refuses or fails to comply with this ordinance, the regulations promulgated by 
the [appropriate authority] or any other law governing the protection and keeping of animals.
b.If an applicant is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on the appli-
cation, the [licensing authority] may refuse to issue or may revoke a permit or license.
c.It shall be a condition of issuance of any permit for an animal establishment that the [appro-
priate authority] shall be permitted to inspect any and all animals and the premises where 
such animals are kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours. Where a per-
mit is revoked for any cause, or pending appeal of any such action, the [appropriate author-
ity]  shall  have  power  of  entry  on  the  premises  and  into  all  areas  where  animals  are  being
kept. A person denied a permit may not reapply for a period of at least thirty (30) days. Each
reapplication shall disclose any previous denial or revocation and shall be accompanied by
a $____ fee.
Section 5. Owner responsibility
a.All dogs and cats shall be kept under restraint.
b.Every  “dangerous”  dog  or  cat,  as  determined  by  the  [appropriate  authority],  shall  be  con-
fined  by  its  owner  within  a  building  or  secure  enclosure  and  shall  be  securely  muzzled  or
caged whenever off the premises of its owner.
c.No dog or cat shall be allowed to cause a nuisance. The owner of every dog or cat shall be
held responsible for every behavior of such dog or cat under the provisions of this ordinance.
d.Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of $_____.
e.Dog and cat owners shall ensure that their dog or cat carries identification at all times in the
form of microchip, tag, or other means to allow easy determination of the owners.
f.Livestock guarding dogs shall be exempt from nuisance regulations when performing duties
protecting livestock on premises owned or controlled by the owner.
Section 6. Impoundment
a.Any dog or cat found running at large shall be impounded by the [animal control authority] in
an animal shelter and confined in a humane manner. Immediately upon impounding a dog 
or cat, the [animal control authority] shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner
and inform such owner of the conditions whereby custody of the animal may be regained.
Dogs and cats not claimed by their owners within a period of [five (5) full days]¶ in which the
shelter is open to the public shall become the property of the [jurisdiction].
b.When a dog or cat is found running at large and its ownership is verified by the [animal con-
trol  authority],  the  authority  may  exercise  the  option  of  serving  the  owner  with  a  notice  of
violation in lieu of impounding the animal.
c.In the event that the [appropriate authority] finds dogs or cats to be suffering, it shall have
the right forthwith to remove or cause to have removed any such animals to a safe place for 
care at the owner’s expense or to euthanatize them when necessary to prevent further suf-
fering. Return to the owner may be withheld until the owner shall have made full payment for
all expenses so incurred.
d.Disposal of an animal by any method specified here in does not relieve the owner of liability
for violations and any accrued charges.
Section 7. Redemption
a.Any animal impounded may be redeemed by the owner thereof within five (5) days upon pay-
ment of an impoundment fee of $____ , provided that if any such animal has been previous-
ly  impounded,  the  impoundment  fee  shall  be  $____  .  Payment  of  impoundment  fees  is  not
considered to be in lieu of any fine, penalty, or license fees.
b.Any animal confined for rabies quarantine, evidence, or other purpose may be redeemed by
the owner thereof upon payment of a fee of $____ .
c.No animal required to be licensed or vaccinated under this ordinance may be redeemed until
provisions for such licensing have been fulfilled.
Section 8. Adoption
An  adoption  fee  of  $____  shall  be  assessed  at  the  time  of  adoption.  No  dog  or  cat  shall  be
released  for  adoption  as  a  pet  without  being  neutered  or  without  a  written  agreement  from  the
adopter guaranteeing that the animal will be neutered. Vaccination fees, licensing fees, and vet-
erinary costs may be assessed above and beyond the adoption fee.
Section 9. Interference
No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the [animal control authority] in the
performance of any duty as herein provided.
Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $____ or more than $____ .
Section 10. Repeals (conflicting ordinances)
All  other  ordinances  of  the  [jurisdiction]  that  are  in  conflict  with  this  ordinance  are  hereby
repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 11. Severability
If  any  part  of  this  ordinance  shall  be  held  invalid,  such  part  shall  be  deemed  severable  and  the
invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this ordinance.
Section 12. Applicability
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon the expiration of days after its passage and
publication.
Section 13. Safety clause
The [jurisdiction] hereby finds, determines, and declares that this ordinance is necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the [jurisdiction] and the inhab-
itants thereof.
*For all occurrences of [ ], communities should insert their applicable agency. †The organizations
developing this model ordinance recommended that licensing tags show, in addition to the license
number, the city or county and state in which the animal is registered. This helps to alleviate the
problem  of  an  animal  being  left  unidentified  or  unclaimed  because  it  has  been  transported  from
one state to another and has no reference to the issuing city or county on the license tag. ‡Where
blanks  are  found  without  insertions,  communities  should  insert  applicable  fees  or  conditions.
§Differential license fees for neutered animals serve as an incentive for responsible pet ownership.
IIBreakaway collars are recommended when tags are affixed to collars worn by cats. ¶It is recog-
nized that holding periods will be determined to some degree by availability of facilities; however,
it is important to ensure a reasonable opportunity for owners to reclaim their dog or cat.
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1747
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
1748Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task ForceJAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001
Appendix 3
Recommended data elements for reports of dog bites
Data element Comment 
Notifications of dog attacks on humans . . . A card or telephone report to be
submitted by those providing
care to the human victim 
Name of victim
Address of victim
Telephone (home and work) 
Parent contact information 
(if a minor) 
Incident date and time 
Reported to whom 
Date and time of report
Notifications of dog attacks on animals   . . A card or telephone report to be
submitted by those providing 
care to the animal victim
Owner of victim
Type of victim
Address of owner  
Telephone (home and work)  
Incident date and time  
Name and address of owner 
or custodian of attacking dog  
Reported to whom  
Date and time of report  
For animal control investigations  
Agency information  
Case number  
Report date and time  
Incident date and time  
Who reported the case  
Report received by  
Location of incident  
Victim information  
Name  
Breed (if animal)  
Age and date of birth  
Sex  
Address  
Telephone (home and work)  
Parent contact information (if minor)  
Rabies immunization status (if animal)  
Owner information  
Name  
Age and date of birth  
Sex  
Address  
Telephone (home and work)  
Data element Comment 
Dog information  
Name  
Breed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Indicate by whose designation 
(eg, owner report, animal control 
officer, law enforcement officer). 
This is important if breed data are 
to be interpreted.
Sex 
Age  
Weight
Reproductive status  
Name of veterinarian  
Rabies vaccination date  
Rabies tag number  
License number  
Microchip number  
Degree of confinement  . . . . . . . . . . Identifying different forms of 
at time of bite confinement (eg, chaining, 
tethering, electronic fence) is 
important if risk associated with 
these practices is to be assessed.
Prior incidents   
Obedience training  
Circumstances of the bite  
Victim account
Owner’s account  
Witness account 
(contact information)  
Number of dogs involved  . . . . . . . . Attacks by multiple dogs may 
account for 20 to 30% of incidents. 
Forms for these animals could be 
given case numbers with a special  
designation (eg, 123A, 123B).
Injury information  
Location of injury  
Nature of injury  
Severity of injury  
Animal disposition  
Quarantine location  
Date of quarantine  
Date to be released  
Quarantined by  
Euthanatized  
Continued on next page.
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1748
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC
JAVMA, Vol 218, No. 11, June 1, 2001 Vet Med Today: Canine Aggression Task Force1749
Appendix 4
Model legislation for the identification and regulation of “dangerous” dogs
A.    Actions allowed by authorized persons prior to hearing
1.If any dog shall attack a person or domestic animal who was peaceably
conducting himself in any place where he may lawfully be, any person,
for  the  purpose  preventing  imminent  injury  or  further  injury,  may  use
such force as is required to stop the attack.
2.A police officer or peace officer acting pursuant to his statutory duties
may, where the threat of serious injury to a person or domestic animal is
imminent and unjustified, use such force as is required to prevent such
injury.
B.    Definitions
1.
a. “Dangerous dog” means any dog which without justification attacks
a  person  or  domestic  animal  causing  physical  injury  or  death,  or
behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses
an  unjustified  imminent  threat  of  serious  injury  or  death  to  one  or
more persons or domestic animals. A dog’s breed shall not be con-
sidered in determining whether or not it is “dangerous.” Further,
b.    No dog may be declared “dangerous” 
i.If  the  dog  was  protecting  or  defending  a  person  within  the
immediate vicinity of the dog from an attack or assault;
ii.     If  at  the  time  the  person  was  committing  a  crime  or  offense
upon the property of the owner, or custodian, of the dog;
iii.    If the person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
dog, or in the past had teased, tormented, abused or assaulted
the dog;
iv.    If the dog was attacked or menaced by the domestic animal, or
the domestic animal was on the property of the owner, or cus-
todian, of the dog;
v.     If the dog was responding to pain or injury, or protecting itself,
its kennels or its offspring;
vi.    If the person or domestic animal was disturbing the dog’s nat-
ural functions such as sleeping or eating.
vii.   Neither  growling  nor  barking,  nor  both,  shall  alone  constitute
grounds upon which to find a dog to be “dangerous.”
2.“Attack” means aggressive physical contact initiated by the dog.
3.“Serious  injury”  means  any  physical  injury  consisting  of  broken  bones
or a permanently disfiguring laceration requiring either multiple stitches
or cosmetic surgery.
4.“Domestic animal” means any animal commonly kept as a pet in family
households in the United States, including, but not limited to dogs, cats,
guinea pigs, rabbits and hamsters; and any animals commonly kept for
companion or commercial purposes.
C.Hearing procedure
1.Any  person  may  make  a  complaint  of  an  alleged  “dangerous”  dog  as
that  term  is  defined  herein  to  a  police  officer  or  peace  officer  of  the
appropriate  municipality.  Such  officers  shall  immediately  inform  the
complainant  of  his  right  to  commence  a  proceeding  provided  for  in
Paragraph  2,  immediately  below,  and,  if  there  is  reason  to  believe  the
dog  is  a  “dangerous”  dog,  the  officer  shall  forthwith  commence  such
proceeding himself.
2.Any  person  may,  and  any  police  officer,  or  peace  officer  acting  within
the scope of his statutory duties, shall make a complaint under oath or
affirmation of an allege dangerous” dog as that term is defined herein to
any municipal judge or justice. Thereupon, the judge or justice, or hear-
ing panel subject to judicial review, shall immediately determine if there
is  probable  cause  to  believe  the  dog  is  a  “dangerous”  dog  and,  if  so,
shall issue an order to any police officer    or peace officer pursuant to
his  statutory  duties  or  animal  control  officer  directing  such  officer  to
immediately seize such dog and hold same pending judicial determina-
tion as herein provided. Whether or not the judge or justice, or hearing
panel subject to judicial review, finds there is probable cause for such
seizure, he shall, within five (5) days and upon written notice of not less
than three (3) days to the owner of the dog, hold a hearing on the com-
plaint. 
D.    Where a dog is determined pursuant to clear and convincing evidence at a
duly constituted hearing to be “dangerous,” the judge or justice, or hearing
panel subject to judicial review, shall require the owner of said animal to reg-
ister such animal (with the appropriate Health Department or animal control
facility),  and  to  provide  prompt  notification  to  (the  appropriate  Health
Department or animal control facility) of any changes in the ownership of the
animal;  names,  addresses  and  telephone  numbers  of  new  owners;  any
change in the health status of the animal; any further instances of attack; any
claims  made  or  lawsuits  brought  as  a  result  of  further  instances  of  attack;
the  death  of  the  animal.  In  addition,  the  judge  or  justice,  or  hearing  panel
subject to judicial review, may require any or all of the following, but items 5,
6  and  11,  or  any  one  of  them,  may  only  be  imposed  where  there  has  been
serious injury to a person.
1.Indoors, when not alone, the dog be under the control of a person eigh-
teen (18) years or older. (Provisions for the dog to be outdoors must also
be made.)
2.Outdoors and unattended, the dog be kept within a locked fenced area
from which it cannot escape.
3.When outdoors the dog must be attended and kept within a fenced area
from which it cannot escape.
4.When outdoors the dog must be attended and kept on a leash no longer
than six (6) feet and under the control of a person eighteen (18) years of
age or older.
5.When  outdoors  the  dog  must  be  attended  and  muzzled.  Such  muzzle
shall not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration
but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal.
6.Outdoors and unattended, the dog must be confined to an escape-proof
kennel of the following description: 
a.Such  kennel  shall  allow  the  dog  to  stand  normally  and  without
restriction,  and  shall  be  at  least  two  and  one  half  (2.5)  times  the
length of the dog, and shall protect the dog from the elements.
b.Fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of more
than  two  (2)  inches,  and  in  the  case  of  wooden  fences,  the  gaps
shall not be more than two (2) inches.
c.Any gates within such kennel or structure shall be lockable and of
such design as to prevent the entry of children or the escape of the
animal, and when the dog is confined to such kennel and unattend-
ed such locks shall be kept locked.
d.The kennel may be required to have double exterior walls to prevent
the insertion of fingers, hands or other objects.
7.Placement of a sign or signs of a description and in places directed by
the  judge  or  justice,  advising  the  public  of  the  presence  and  tenden-
cies of said animal.
8.     Attendance  by  the  dog  and  its  owner/custodian  at  training  sessions
conducted by a certified applied animal behaviorist, board certified vet-
erinary  behaviorist  or  other  recognized  expert  in  the  field  and  comple-
tion  of  training  or  any  other  treatment  as  deemed  appropriate  by  such
expert. The owners of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associ-
ated with the evaluation and training ordered under this section.
9.Neutering  or  spaying  of  the  dog  at  the  owner’s  expense,  unless  med-
ically contraindicated.
10.   That  the  dog  be  permanently  identified  by  tattooing  or  by  injecting  an
identification  microchip,  using  standard  veterinary  procedures  and
practices, identification number and the identification of the person per-
forming  the  procedure  to  be  registered  with  the  (appropriate  health
department or animal control facility) as indicated above.
11.   The procurement of liability insurance in an amount to be determined by
the judge or justice, but in no case in an amount of less than fifty thou-
sand  dollars  ($50,000),  covering  the  medical  and  or  veterinary  costs
resulting from future actions of the dog (a determination of liability shall
be made in accordance with the laws of the jurisdiction). This condition
may not be imposed if it is shown that no such insurance is available for
a reasonable premium.
12.   If any of the above conditions ordered by a judge or justice, or hearing
panel subject to judicial review, are not complied with, the owner shall
be subject to a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000).
13.   If a further incident of attack occurs under such circumstances that the
dog, after a hearing as described above, is determined to be a “danger-
ous”  dog,  the  judge  or  justice,  or  hearing  panel  subject  to  judicial
review, may impose or reimpose any applicable directives listed above;
additionally,  humane  destruction  of  the  dog  may  be  ordered,  but  only
where the further incident involves serious injury to a person. 
Appendix 5
Suggested reading for professionals (numbers correspond to cited references)
GroupReference numbers 
Public officials and community leaders 4, 6, 8-9, 10, 12, 14-16, 18, 20, 27-28, 30, 32-47  
Veterinarians 1, 4-10, 12, 14-16, 27-28, 30, 32, 35-36, 39, 41-73  
Veterinary technicians 7, 12, 16, 28, 43-45, 47, 50-57, 59,61, 63-64, 66-69, 74  
Physicians and nurses 4-6, 8-10, 12, 14-15, 27-28, 30, 32,  35-36, 41, 43, 45-48, 60, 
70-71, 73, 75-76 
Humane society/animal shelter/4-6, 10, 12, 14-15, 27-28, 30, 35-36, 41-43, 51-55, 61, 66, 69, 71
rescue personnel
0601CANINETASKFORCEALTERNAT.QXD  10/7/2005  10:48 AM  Page 1749
Unauthenticated | Downloaded 06/29/26 08:32 PM UTC