Title of the paper:
CAT – A Computational Anatomy Toolbox for the
Analysis of Structural MRI Data
Names and institutions of all authors:
Christian Gaser
a*
, Robert Dahnke
a
, Paul M Thompson
b
, Florian Kurth
c+
, Eileen Luders
c,d,e+
,
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
1
a
Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany
b
Imaging Genetics Center, Stevens Neuroimaging & Informatics Institute, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
c
School of Psychology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand
d
Department of Women’s and Children’s Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
e
Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA
1
Data used in preparation of this article were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative (ADNI) database (adni.loni.usc.edu). As such, the investigators within the ADNI contributed
to the design and implementation of ADNI and/or provided data but did not participate in analysis or
writing of this report. A complete listing of ADNI investigators can be found at:
http://adni.loni.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/how_to_apply/ADNI_Acknowledgement_List.pdf
+
Shared last authorship
*Correspondence should be addressed to:
Christian Gaser, Ph.D.
Structural Brain Mapping Group
Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital
Am Klinikum 1, D-07747 Jena, Germany
Phone: ++49-3641-9325778 | Fax: ++49-3641-9325772
E-mail: christian.gaser@uni-jena.de
Number of Words in Abstract:146
Number of Figures:6
Supplemental Material:5 figures, 2 tables
Keywords:
brain, computational anatomy, longitudinal, morphometry, SPM12, CAT12, MRI, ROI,
VBM, cortical thickness, cortical surface, cortical folding, Alzheimer’s disease
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Abstract
A large range of sophisticated brain image analysis tools have been developed by the
neuroscience community, greatly advancing the field of human brain mapping. Here we
introduce theComputational Anatomy Toolbox(CAT) - a powerful suite of tools for
morphometric analyses with an intuitive graphical user interface, but also usable as a shell
script. CAT is suitable for beginners, casual users, experts, and developers alike providing a
comprehensive set of analysis options, workflows, and integrated pipelines. The available
analysis streams – illustrated on an example dataset – allow for voxel-based, surface-based,
as well as region-based morphometric analyses. Importantly, CAT includes various quality
control options and covers the entire analysis workflow, from cross-sectional or longitudinal
data processing, to the statistical analysis, and visualization of results. The overarching aim
of this article is to provide a complete description of CAT, while, at the same time, offering a
citable standard reference.
1
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Main
The brain is the most complex organ of the human body, and no two brains are alike. The
study of the human brain is still in its infancy, but rapid technical advances in image
acquisition and image processing have allowed for ever more refined characterizations of its
micro- and macro-structure. Enormous efforts, for example, have been made to map
differences between groups (e.g., young vs. old, diseased vs. healthy, male vs. female), to
capture changes over time (e.g., from infancy to old age, or in the framework of
neuroplasticity, as a result of a clinical intervention), or to assess correlations of brain
attributes (e.g., measures of length, volume, shape) with behavioral, cognitive, or clinical
parameters. Sophisticated tools for such analyses - which can be voxel-based, surface-based,
or region-based - have been provided with popular analysis, discovery, and visualization
tools, such as FreeSurfer (https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu), the Human Connectome
Workbench  (https://www.humanconnectome.org/software/connectome-workbench),  FSL
(https://www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl),BrainVISA(http://www.brainvisa.info),CIVET
(https://mcin.ca/technology/civet),ortheLONItools
(https://www.loni.usc.edu/research/software), to name just a few.
Given its strengths for brain image processing and analysis, one of the most
frequently used software packages is SPM - short forStatistical Parametric Mapping
(https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). SPM is equipped with an interactive batch editor and a
library of accessible and editable scripts, which provides an ideal basis to extend the
repertoire of available analysis options. Here we introduce CAT - short forComputational
Anatomy Toolbox(http://www.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat) - for SPM. The CAT toolbox offers a
2
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
comprehensive range of cutting-edge analysis options and integrated pipelines, ranging
from data processing to the visualization of the results. CAT presents itself through an
intuitive user interface, comes as a collection of accessible scripts, and uses the same batch
editor as SPM, which allows for a seamless integration with SPM workflows and other
toolboxes, such as Brainstorm (Tadel et al., 2011) and ExploreASL (Mutsaerts et al., 2020).
While this will enable beginners and experts to run complex state-of-the-art structural
image analyses within the SPM environment, advanced users and developers will appreciate
the possibility to employ a wide range of functions in their own customized workflows and
pipelines.
Results
Concept and Performance of CAT
CAT12 is the current version of the CAT software and runs in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick,
MA) or as a standalone version with no need for a Matlab license. It was originally designed
to work with SPM12 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12) and is compatible
with Matlab versions 7.4 (R2007a) and later. No additional software or toolbox is required.
The latest version of CAT can be downloaded here:http://www.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat. The
pre-compiled standalone version for Windows, Mac, or Linux operating systems can be
downloaded here:https://sites.google.com/view/enigma-cat12/enigma-cat12/standalone.
All  steps  necessary  to  install  and  run  CAT  are  documented  in  the  user  manual
(http://www.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat12/CAT12-Manual.pdf) and in the complementary online
help, which can be accessed directly via CAT’s help functions. The CAT software is free but
3
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
copyrighted and distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License, as
published by the Free Software Foundation.
CAT can be either started through SPM, from the Matlab command window, from a
shell, or as a standalone version. Except when called from the command shell (CAT is fully
scriptable), a user interface will appear (seeFigure 1) allowing easy access to all analysis
options and most additional functions. In addition, a graphical output window will display
the interactive help to get started. This interactive help will be replaced by the results of the
analyses (i.e., in that same window), but can always be called again via the user interface.
CAT allows processing streams to be distributed to multiple processing cores, to
reduce processing time. For example, an analysis using data from 50 subjects (seeExample
Application) leveraging the inbuilt parallel processing capabilities on four cores, required
seven hours processing time when analyzing one image per subject (cross-sectional stream),
and 18 hours when processing three images per subject (longitudinal stream) for the entire
sample. The application of all available workflows for a single T1-weighted image takes
around 35 minutes, as timed on an iMac with Intel Core i7 with 4 GHz and 32 GB RAM using
Matlab 2017b, SPM12 r7771, and CAT12.8 r1945.
4
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
— Figure 1 (GUI) —
Figure 1:Elements of the graphical user interface.
The SPM menu (a) and CAT menu (b) allow access to the (c) SPM batch editor to control and combine a variety
of functions. At the end of the processing stream, cross-sectional and longitudinal outputs are summarized in a
brain-specific one-page report (d, e). In addition, CAT provides options to check image quality (f) and sample
homogeneity (g) to allow outliers to be removed before applying the final statistical analysis, including
threshold-free cluster enhancement– TFCE (h); the numerical and graphical output can then be retrieved (i),
including surface projections (j). For beginners, there is an interactive help (k) as well as a user manual (l). For
experts, command line tools (m) are available under Linux and MacOS.
Computational Morphometry
CAT’s processing pipeline (seeFigure 2) contains two main streams: (1) voxel-based
processing forvoxel-based morphometry(VBM) and (2) surface-based processing for
surface-based morphometry(SBM). The former is a prerequisite for the latter, but not the
other way round. Both processing streams can be extended to include additional steps for
(3) region-based processing andregion-based morphometry(RBM).
5
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
—Figure 2 (main processing pipelines)—
Figure 2:Two main processing streams
Image processing in CAT can be separated into a mandatory voxel-based processing stream and an optional
subsequent surface-based processing stream. Each stream requires different templates and atlases and, in
addition, tissue probability maps for the voxel-based stream. The voxel-based stream consists of two main
modules – one for tissue segmentation and another one for spatial registration – resulting in spatially
registered (and modulated) gray matter / white matter segments, which provides the basis forvoxel-based
morphometry(VBM). The surface-based stream also consists of two main modules – one for surface creation
and another for surface registration – resulting in spatially registered surface maps, which provide the basis for
surface-based morphometry(SBM). Both streams also include an optional module each to analyzeregions of
interest(ROIs) resulting in ROI-specific mean volumes (mean surface values, respectively). This provides the
basis forregion-based morphometry(RBM).
Voxel-based Processing
Voxel-based processing comprises a series of steps that can be roughly divided into a
module for tissue segmentation, which is followed by a module for spatial registration.
●Tissue Segmentation: The process is initiated by applying aspatially adaptive
non-local means(SANLM) denoising filter (Manjón et al., 2010) and followed by
applying SPM’s standardunified segmentation(Ashburner and Friston, 2005). The
6
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
resulting output then serves as a starting point for further optimizations and CAT’s
tissue segmentation steps: first, the brain is parcellated into the left and right
hemisphere, subcortical areas, ventricles, and the cerebellum. In addition, local
white matter hyperintensities are detected (to be later accounted for during the
spatial registration and the optional surface processing). Second, a local intensity
transformation is performed to reduce the effects of higher gray matter intensities in
the motor cortex, basal ganglia, and occipital lobe. Third, anadaptive maximum a
posteriori(AMAP) segmentation is applied which does not rely on anya priori
information on the tissue probabilities (Rajapakse, Giedd and Rapoport, 1997). The
AMAP segmentation also includes apartial volume estimation(Tohka, Zijdenbos and
Evans,  2004).Figure 3provides information on the accuracy of CAT’s tissue
segmentation.
●Spatial Registration: DARTEL (Ashburner, 2007) or Geodesic Shooting (Ashburner and
Friston, 2011) are used to register the individual tissue segments to standardized
templates in the ICBM 2009c Nonlinear Asymmetric space (MNI152NLin2009cAsym;
https://www.bic.mni.mcgill.ca/ServicesAtlases/ICBM152NLin2009),hereafter
referred to as MNI space. While MNI space is also used in many other software
packages, thus allowing for easy comparability across studies, users may also choose
to use their own templates.Figure 3provides information on the accuracy of CAT’s
spatial registration.
7
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Voxel-based Morphometry (VBM)
VBM is applied to investigate the volume (or local amount) of a specific tissue compartment
(Ashburner and Friston, 2005; Kurth, Luders and Gaser, 2015) - usually gray matter. VBM
incorporates different processing steps: (a) tissue segmentation and (b) spatial registration
as detailed above, and in addition (c) adjustments for volume changes due to the
registration  (modulation)  as well as (d) convolution with a Gaussian kernel (spatial
smoothing). As a side note, the modulation step results in voxel-wise gray matter volumes
that are the same as in native space (i.e., before spatial registration) and not corrected for
brain size yet. Therefore, to remove effects of brain size, users have at least two options: (1)
calculating thetotal intracranial volume(TIV) and including TIV as a covariate in the
statistical model (Malone et al., 2015) or (2) selecting ‘global scaling’ (see 2nd level options
in SPM). The latter is recommended if TIV is linked with (i.e., not orthogonal to) the effect of
interest (e.g., sex), which can be tested (see ‘Design orthogonality’ in SPM).
Surface-based Processing
The optional surface-based processing comprises a series of steps that can be roughly
divided into a module for surface creation, which is followed by a module for surface
registration.
●Surface Creation:Figure 3illustrates the surface creation step in CAT for data
obtained on scanners with different field strengths (1.5, 3.0, and 7.0 Tesla). CAT uses
a projection-based thickness method (Dahnke, Yotter and Gaser, 2013) which
estimates the initial cortical thickness and initial central surface in a combined step,
8
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
while handling partial volume information, sulcal blurring, and sulcal asymmetries,
without explicit sulcus reconstruction. After this initial step, topological defects (i.e.,
anatomically  incorrect  connections  between  gyri  or  sulci) are repaired using
spherical harmonics (Rachel Aine Yotter et al., 2011). The topological correction is
followed by a surface refinement, which results in the final central, pial and white
surface meshes. In the last step, the final pial and white matter surfaces are used to
refine the initial cortical thickness estimate using the FreeSurfer thickness metric
(Fischl and Dale, 2000; Masouleh et al., 2020). Alternatively, the final central surface
can  be  used  to  calculate  metrics  of  cortical  folding,  as  described  under
Surface-based Morphometry.
●Surface Registration: The resulting individual central surfaces are registered to the
corresponding    hemisphere    of    the    FreeSurferFsAveragetemplate
(https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/FsAverage).  During  this  process,  the
individual central surfaces are spherically inflated with minimal distortions (Yotter,
Thompson and Gaser, 2011) and a one-to-one mapping between the folding patterns
of the individual and template spheres is created by a 2D-version of the DARTEL
approach (Ashburner, 2007).Figure 3provides information on the accuracy of CAT’s
surface registration.
9
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
— Figure 3 (processing accuracy / consistency) —
Figure 3:Evaluation of segmentation and registration accuracy
(a) Segmentation Accuracy: Most approaches to brain segmentation assume that each voxel belongs to a
particular tissue class, such asgray matter(GM),white matter(WM), orcerebrospinal fluid(CSF). However, the
spatial resolution of brain images is limited, leading to so-calledpartial volume effects(PVE) in voxels
containing a mixture of different tissue types, such as GM/WM and GM/CSF. As PVE approaches are highly
susceptible to noise, we combined the PVE model (Tohka, Zijdenbos and Evans, 2004) with a spatial adaptive
non-local means denoising filter (Manjón et al., 2010). To validate our method, we used a ground truth image
from the BrainWeb (Aubert-Broche, Evans and Collins, 2006) database with varying noise levels of 1-9%. The
segmentation accuracy for all tissue types (GM, WM, CSF) was determined by calculating akappacoefficient (a
kappa coefficient of 1 means that there is perfect correspondence between the segmentation result and the
ground truth). Left panel: The effect of the PVE model and the denoising filter on the tissue segmentation at
the extremes of 1% and 9% noise. Right panel. The kappa coefficient over the range of different noise levels.
Both panels demonstrate the advantage of combining the PVE model with a spatial adaptive non-local means
denoising filter, with particularly strong benefits for noisy data.
(b) Registration Accuracy: To ensure an appropriate overlap of corresponding anatomical regions across brains,
high-dimensional nonlinear spatial registration is required. CAT uses sophisticated DARTEL (Ashburner, 2007)
10
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
and Shooting approaches (Ashburner and Friston, 2011) together with an average template created from the
IXI dataset (http://www.brain-development.org). The figure shows the improved accuracy (i.e., a more detailed
average image) when spatially registering 555 brains using the Shooting registration and the Dartel registration
compared to the SPM standard registration.
(c) Preprocessing Accuracy: We validated the performance ofregion-based morphometry(RBM) in CAT by
comparing measures derived from automatically extractedregions of interest(ROI) versus manually labeled
ROIs. For the voxel-based analysis, we used 56 structures that were manually labeled in 40 brains which
provided the basis for the LPBA40 atlas (Shattuck et al., 2008). The gray matter volumes from those manually
labeled regions served as the ground truth against which the gray matter volumes calculated using CAT and the
LPBA40 atlas were then compared. For the surface-based analysis, we used 34 structures that were manually
labeled in 39 brains according to Desikan (Desikan et al., 2006). The mean cortical thickness from those
manually labeled regions served as the ground truth against which the mean cortical thickness calculated using
CAT and the Desikan atlas was compared. The diagrams show that there is an excellent overlap between
manually and automatically labeled regions in both voxel-based (left) and surface-based (right) analyses.
(d) Consistency of Segmentation and Surface Creation: Data from the same brain were acquired on MRI
scanners with different isotropic spatial resolutions and different field strengths: 1.5T MPRAGE with 1 mm
voxel size; 3T MPRAGE with 0.8 mm voxel size; and 7T MP2RAGE with 0.7 mm voxel size. Section views: The left
hemispheres depict the central (green), pial (blue), and white matter (red) surfaces; the right hemispheres
show the gray matter segments. Rendered Views: The color bar encodes point-wise cortical thickness
projected onto the central surface of the left hemisphere. Both section views and hemisphere renderings
demonstrate the consistency of the outcomes of the segmentation and surface creation procedures across
different spatial resolutions and field strengths.
Surface-based Morphometry (SBM)
SBM is applied to investigate cortical thickness or various parameters of cortical folding. The
measurement of ‘cortical thickness’ captures the width of the gray matter ribbon as the
distance between its inner and outer boundary at thousands of points (seeFigure 4). To
obtain measurements of ‘cortical folding’ the user has a variety of options in CAT, ranging
fromGyrification (Luders et al., 2006)toSulcal Depth(Essen, 2005) toCortical Complexity
(Rachel A Yotter et al., 2011) to theSurface Ratio(Toro et al., 2008), as further explained and
illustrated inFigure 4. Similar to VBM, SBM incorporates a series of different steps: (a)
surface creation and (b) surface registration as detailed above, and in addition (c) spatial
smoothing. As a side note, since the measurements in native space are mapped directly to
the template during the spatial registration, no additional modulation (as in VBM) is needed
11
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
to preserve the individual differences. In contrast to VBM, SBM does not require brain size
corrections because cortical thickness and cortical folding are not closely associated with
brain volume (unlike gray matter volume) (Barnes et al., 2010).
— Figure 4 (cortical measures) —
Figure 4: Cortical Measurements
Surface-based morphometry is applied to investigate features of the cortical surface (i.e., cortical thickness and
various parameters of cortical folding) at thousands of surface points.Cortical Thickness: One of the best
known and most frequently used morphometric measures is cortical thickness, which captures the width of
the gray matter ribbon as the distance between its inner boundary (white matter surface) and outer boundary
(pial surface).Cortical Folding: CAT provides distinct cortical folding measures, which are derived from the
geometry of the central surface: ‘Gyrification’ is calculated via the absolute mean curvature (Carmo, 2016) of
the central surface. ‘Sulcal Depth’ is calculated as the distance from the central surface to the enclosing hull
(Essen, 2005). ‘Cortical Complexity’ is calculated using the fractal dimension of the central surface area from
spherical harmonic reconstructions (Rachel A Yotter et al., 2011). Finally, ‘Surface Ratio’ is calculated as the
ratio between the area of the central surface contained in a sphere of a defined size and that of a disk with the
same radius (Toro et al., 2008).
Region-based Processing and Morphometry
In addition to voxel or point-wise analyses via VBM or SBM, CAT provides an option to
conduct regional analyses viaregion-based morphometry(RBM). For this purpose, the
processing steps under voxel-based processing (surface-based processing, respectively)
12
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
should be applied and followed by automatically calculating regional measurements. This is
achieved through working with regions of interest (ROIs) as defined using standardized
atlases.  The  required  atlases  are  provided  in  CAT  (seeSupplemental Table 1and
Supplemental Table 2), but users can also choose to work with their own atlases.
●Voxel-based ROIs: The volumetric atlases available in CAT have been defined on brain
templates in MNI space and can be mapped to the individual brains by using the
spatial  registration  parameters  determined  during  voxel-based  processing.
Volumetric measures, such as regional gray matter volume, can then be calculated
for each ROI in native space.
●Surface-based ROIs: The surface atlases available in CAT are supplied on the
FsAveragesurface and can be mapped to the individual surfaces by using the
spherical registration parameters determined during the surface-based processing.
Surface-based measures, such as cortical thickness or cortical folding, are then
calculated for each ROI in native space.
Five Selected Features
1. Longitudinal Processing
Aside from offering a standard pipeline for cross-sectional analyses, CAT has specific
longitudinal pipelines that ensure a local comparability both across subjects and across time
points  within  subjects.  Compared  to  the  cross-sectional pipeline, these longitudinal
pipelines render analysis outcomes more accurate when mapping structural changes over
time. The user can chose between three different longitudinal pipelines: the first one for
13
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
analyzing brain plasticity (over days, weeks, months); the second one for analyzing brain
development (over months and years); and the third one for brain aging (over months,
years, decades). For more details, refer toSupplemental Notes 1.
2. Quality Control
CAT introduces a retrospective quality control framework for the empirical quantification of
essential image parameters, such as noise, intensity inhomogeneities, and image resolution
(all of these can be impacted, for example, by motion artifacts). Separate parameter-specific
ratings are provided as well as a handy overall rating (Gilmore, Buser and Hanson, 2021).
Moreover,  image  outliers  can  be  easily  identified,  either  directly  based  on  the
aforementioned indicators of the image quality or by calculating a Spearman's rank
correlation coefficient which is determined by the quality of the image processing as well as
by the anatomical characteristics of each brain. For more details, refer toSupplemental
Notes 2.
3. Mapping onto the Cortical Surface
CAT allows the user to map voxel-based values (e.g., quantitative, functional, or diffusion
parameters) to individual brain surfaces (i.e., pial, central, and/or white matter) for
surface-based analyses. The integrated equi-volume model (Bok, 1929) also considers the
shift of cytoarchitectonic layers caused by the local folding. Optionally, CAT also allows
mapping of voxel values for multiple positions at each node - supporting a layer-specific
14
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
analysis of ultra-high resolution functional MRI data (Waehnert et al., 2014; Kemper et al.,
2017). For more details, refer toSupplemental Notes 3.
4. Threshold-free Cluster Enhancement (TFCE)
CAT comes with its own TFCE toolbox and provides the option to apply TFCE (Smith and
Nichols, 2009) in any statisticalsecond-levelanalysis in SPM, both for voxel-based and for
surface-based analyses. It can also be employed to analyzefunctional MRI(fMRI) or
diffusion tensor imaging(DTI) data. A particularly helpful feature of the TFCE toolbox is that
it  automatically recognizes exchangeability blocks and potential nuisance parameters
(Winkler et al., 2014) from an existing statistical design in SPM. For more details, refer to
Supplemental Notes 4.
5. Visualization
CAT allows a user to generate graphs and images, which creates a solid basis to explore
findings as well as to generate ready-to-publish figures according to prevailing standards.
More specifically, it includes two distinct sets of tools to visualize results: the first set
prepares both voxel- and surface-based data for visualization by providing options for
thresholding the default SPM T-maps or F-maps and for converting statistical parameters
(e.g., from T-maps and F-maps into p-maps). The second set of tools visualizes the data
offering the user ample options to select from different brain templates, views, slices,
significance parameters, significance thresholds, color schemes, etc. (seeFigure5).
15
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
— Figure 5 (visualization) —
Figure 5:Examples of CAT’s visualization of results.
Both surface- and voxel-based data can be presented on surfaces such as (a) the (inflated) FsAverage surface,
or (b) the flatmap of the Connectome Workbench. In addition, volumetric maps can be displayed as (c) slice
overlays on the MNI average brain, or (d) as a maximum intensity projection (so-called “glass brains”). All
panels  show the corrected p-values from the longitudinal VBM study in our example (see Example
Application).
Example Application
To demonstrate an application of CAT, we investigated an actual dataset focusing on the
effects of Alzheimer’s disease on brain structure. More specifically, we set out to compare
25 patients with Alzheimer’s disease and 25 matched controls. We applied (I) a VBM analysis
focusing on voxel-wise gray matter volume, (II) a RBM analysis focussing on regional gray
matter volume (i.e., a voxel-based ROI analysis), (III) a surface-based analysis focusing on
point-wise cortical thickness, and (IV) a RBM analysis focussing on regional cortical thickness
16
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(i.e., a surface-based ROI analysis). Given the wealth of literature on Alzheimer’s disease, we
expected atrophy in gray matter volume and cortical thickness in patients compared to
controls, particularly in regions around the medial temporal lobe and the default mode
network (Dickerson, 2010; Bayram, Caldwell and Banks, 2018). In addition to distinguishing
between the four morphological measures (I-IV), all analyses were conducted using both
cross-sectional and longitudinal streams as supported in CAT. Overall, we expected that
longitudinal changes would manifest in similar brain regions to cross-sectional group
differences, but that cross-sectional effects will be more pronounced than longitudinal
effects. The outcomes of this example analysis are presented and discussed in the next
section.
Discussion
As shown inFigure 6, all four cross-sectional streams – investigating voxel-based gray matter
volume, regional gray matter volume, point-wise thickness, and regional thickness –
revealed widespread group differences between AD patients and matched controls. Overall,
the effects were comparable between cross-sectional and longitudinal streams, but the
significant clusters were more pronounced cross-sectionally (note the different thresholds
cross-sectionally and longitudinally).
More specifically, using VBM, significantly smaller voxel-wise gray matter volumes
were observed in AD patients compared to controls, particularly in the medial and lateral
temporal lobes and within regions of the default mode network (Figure 6a top). Similarly,
the longitudinal follow-up revealed a significantly stronger gray matter volume loss in
patients compared to controls, with effects located in the medial temporal lobe as well as
17
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
the default mode network (Figure 6a bottom). The voxel-based ROI analysis resulted in a
significance  pattern  similar  to  the  VBM  study,  with  particularly  pronounced  group
differences in the temporal lobe that extended into additional brain areas including those
comprising the default mode network (Figure 6b top). Again, the longitudinal analysis
yielded similar but less pronounced findings than the cross-sectional analysis, although
longitudinal effects were stronger than in the VBM analysis (Figure 6b bottom).
Using SBM, the point-wise cortical thickness analysis yielded a pattern similar to the
VBM analysis with significantly thinner cortices in patients, particularly in the medial and
lateral temporal lobe and within regions of the default mode network (Figure 6c top). Just as
in the VBM analysis, significant clusters were widespread and reached far into adjacent
regions. Again, the results from the longitudinal stream were less widespread and significant
than  the  results  from  the  cross-sectional  stream  (Figure  6c  bottom).  Finally,  the
surface-based ROI analysis largely replicated the local findings from the SBM analysis (Figure
6d top / bottom).
Overall, the results from all analysis streams corroborate previously reported findings
in the Alzheimer’s disease literature, particularly the strong disease effects within the
medial temporal lobe and regions of the default mode network (Dickerson, 2010; Bayram,
Caldwell and Banks, 2018). Furthermore, the comparable pattern across measures suggests
a considerable consistency between available morphometric options, even if gray matter
volume and cortical thickness are biologically different and not perfectly related (Hutton et
al., 2009; Winkler et al., 2018).
18
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
–Figure 6 (example application)–
Figure 6:Pronounced atrophy in gray matter and cortical thickness in patients with Alzheimer’s disease
compared to healthy control subjects.
(a)Voxel-based Morphometry(VBM) findings: The results were estimated usingthreshold-free cluster
enhancement(TFCE), corrected for multiple comparisons by controlling thefamily-wise error(FWE), and
thresholded at p<0.001 for cross-sectional data and p<0.05 for longitudinal data. The significant findings were
projected onto orthogonal sections intersecting at (x=-27mm, y=-10mm, z=-19mm) of the mean brain created
from the entire study sample (n=50).
(b) VolumetricRegions of Interest(ROI) findings: ROIs were defined using the Neuromorphometrics atlas. The
results were corrected for multiple comparisons by controlling thefalse discovery rate(FDR) and thresholded
at q<0.001 for cross-sectional data and q<0.05 for longitudinal data. The significant findings were projected
onto the same orthogonal sections as for the VBM findings.
(c)Surface-based Morphometry(SBM) findings: The results were estimated using TFCE, FWE-corrected, and
thresholded at p<0.001 for cross-sectional data and p<0.05 for longitudinal data. The significant findings were
projected onto the FreeSurferFsAveragesurface.
(d) Surface ROI findings: ROIs were defined using the DK40 atlas. Results were FDR-corrected and thresholded
at q<0.001 for cross-sectional data and q<0.05 for longitudinal data. Significant findings were projected onto
theFsAveragesurface.
19
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Conclusion
CAT is suitable for desktop/laptop computers as well as high-performance clusters. It is fully
integrated into the SPM environment within Matlab, but also allows process execution
directly from the command shell, without having to start SPM. CAT is also available as a
standalone version, altogether avoiding the need for a Matlab license. Furthermore, CAT is
easy to integrate with non-SPM software packages and also supports theBrain Imaging
Data Structure(BIDS) standards (Krzysztof et al., 2015). Therefore, CAT is ideally suited not
only to process small datasets (as demonstrated in the example application), but also big
datasets, such as samples of the UK Biobank (https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk) or ENIGMA
(https://enigma.ini.usc.edu). Finally, while CAT is currently targeted at structural imaging
data, some features (e.g., high-dimensional spatial registration or mapping onto the cortical
surface) may also be used for the analysis of functional, diffusion, or quantitative MRI or
EEG/MEG data.
20
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Methods
Application Example: Data Source
Data for the application example were obtained from the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging
Initiative  (ADNI)  database (adni.loni.usc.edu). The ADNI was launched in 2003 as a
public-private partnership, led by Principal Investigator Michael W. Weiner, MD. The primary
goal of ADNI has been to test whether serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron
emission tomography (PET), other biological markers, and clinical and neuropsychological
assessment can be combined to measure the progression of mild cognitive impairment
(MCI)   and   early   Alzheimer’s   disease   (AD).   For   up-to-date  information,  see
www.adni-info.org.
Application Example: Sample Characteristics
For the purpose of the current study, we compiled a sample of fifty subjects with 3D
T1-weighted structural brain images from the ADNI database. Specifically, we randomly
selected the first 25 subjects (16 males / 9 females) classified as AD patients (mean age
75.74±8.14 years; meanminimal mental status examination(MMSE) score: 23.44±2.04) and
matched them for sex and age with 25 healthy controls (mean age 76.29±3.90 years; mean
MMSE: 28.96±1.24). All subjects had brain scans at baseline (first scan at enrolment) and at
two follow-up visits, at one year and at two years after the first scan. All brain images were
acquired on 1.5 Tesla scanners (Siemens, General Electric, Philips) using a 3D T1-weighted
sequence with an in-plane resolution between 0.94 and 1.25 mm and a slice thickness of 1.2
mm.
21
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Application Example: Data Processing
All  T1-weighted  data  were  processed  using  CAT12  following the cross-sectional (or
longitudinal, respectively) processing stream for VBM, SBM (cortical thickness), and ROI
analyses (seeFigure 2) according to the descriptions provided underComputational
Morphometry.  For  each  subject,  only  their  first  time  point  was  included  in  the
cross-sectional stream, whereas all three time points were included in the longitudinal
stream. The processing streams for the VBM analysis resulted in modulated and registered
gray matter segments, which were smoothed using a 6 mm Gaussian kernel. The image
processing streams for the SBM analysis resulted in the registered point-wise cortical
thickness measures, which were smoothed using a 12 mm Gaussian Kernel. The voxel-based
ROI analysis used the Neuromorphometrics atlas (http://Neuromorphometrics.com/) to
calculate the regional gray matter volumes; the surface-based ROI analysis employed the
DK40 atlas (Desikan et al., 2006) to calculate regional cortical thickness.
Application Example: Statistical Analysis
For each variable of interest – voxel-wise gray matter volume, regional gray matter volume,
point-wise cortical thickness, and regional cortical thickness – the dependent measures
(e.g., the registered, modulated, and smoothed gray matter segments for voxel-wise gray
matter) were entered into the statistical model. For the cross-sectional stream,group
(Alzheimer’s disease patients vs. controls) was defined as the independent variable. For the
longitudinal  stream,  the  interaction  betweengroupandtimewas  defined  as  the
22
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
independent variable, whereassubjectwas defined as a variable of no interest. For the VBM
and the voxel-based ROI analyses, data were corrected for TIV using ‘global scaling’ (because
TIV correlated withgroup, the effect of interest). Since cortical thickness does not scale with
brain size (Barnes et al., 2010), no corrections for TIV were applied for the SBM and the
surface-based ROI analyses.
For the VBM and SBM analyses, results were corrected for multiple comparisons by
applying TFCE (Smith and Nichols, 2009) and controlling the family-wise error at p≤0.001
(cross-sectional) and p≤0.05 (longitudinal). For the voxel-based and surface-based ROI
analyses, results were corrected for multiple comparisons by controlling the false discovery
rate (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) at q≤0.001 (cross-sectional) and q≤0.05 (longitudinal).
The outcomes of the VBM and voxel-based ROI analyses were overlaid onto
orthogonal sections of the mean brain created from the entire study sample (n=50); the
outcomes of the SBM and surface-based ROI analyses were projected onto theFsAverage
surface.
23
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Acknowledgments
This article received support through the Humboldt Foundation (Germany) and a Hood
Fellowship from the University of Auckland (New Zealand). It was also supported by the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development of the
National Institutes of Health (R01HD081720) and by the Royal Society of New Zealand
(Marsden 20-UOA-045). Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) (National Institutes of Health Grant U01
AG024904) and DOD ADNI (Department of Defense award number W81XWH-12-2-0012).
ADNI is funded by the National Institute on Aging, the National Institute of Biomedical
Imaging and Bioengineering, and through generous contributions from the following:
AbbVie, Alzheimer’s Association; Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; Araclon Biotech;
BioClinica, Inc.; Biogen; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; CereSpir, Inc.; Cogstate; Eisai Inc.;
Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.; Eli Lilly and Company; EuroImmun; F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd and
its  affiliated company Genentech, Inc.; Fujirebio; GE Healthcare; IXICO Ltd.; Janssen
Alzheimer  Immunotherapy  Research  &  Development,  LLC.;  Johnson  &  Johnson
Pharmaceutical Research & Development LLC.; Lumosity; Lundbeck; Merck & Co., Inc.; Meso
Scale   Diagnostics,   LLC.;   NeuroRx   Research;   Neurotrack   Technologies;   Novartis
Pharmaceuticals Corporation; Pfizer Inc.; Piramal Imaging; Servier; Takeda Pharmaceutical
Company; and Transition Therapeutics. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is
providing funds to support ADNI clinical sites in Canada. Private sector contributions are
facilitated by the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (www.fnih.org). The
grantee organization is the Northern California Institute for Research and Education, and the
study is coordinated by the Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute at the University of
24
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Southern California. ADNI data are disseminated by the Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI)
at the University of Southern California (USC).
25
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Supplemental Material
Supplemental Notes
Supplemental Note 1: Longitudinal Processing
The majority of morphometric studies are based on cross-sectional data in which one image
is acquired for each subject. Nevertheless, the mapping of structural changes over time
requires specific longitudinal designs that consider additional time points (and thus images)
for each subject. In theory, all images could be processed using the standard cross-sectional
processing workflow. In practice, however, longitudinal data strongly benefit from workflows
specifically  tailored  towards  longitudinal  analyses,  where  MR-based  noise  and
inhomogeneities are further reduced and where spatial correspondences are ensured, the
latter not only across subjects but also across time points within subjects (Reuter, Rosas and
Fischl, 2010; Reuter and Fischl, 2011; Ashburner and Ridgway, 2012). As a consequence,
analyses become more sensitive, as shown inSupplemental Figure 1.
Supplemental  Figure  1:Comparison  between  CAT’s  cross-sectional  and  longitudinal  pipelines  using
longitudinal data
Voxel-based morphometry(VBM) results are shown on the left andsurface-based morphometry(SBM) results
on the right. For both VBM and SBM the longitudinal preprocessing leads to an increased sensitivity compared
to cross-sectional processing, which is evident as larger clusters and lower p-values (panels a and b) as well as
larger effect sizes (panels c and d). The effect sizes are captured as Cohen’s d on the x-axis with the frequency
of its occurrence normalized to a total sum of one (to ease comparisons between histograms) on the y-axis.
26
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
CAT  offers  three  optimized  processing  pipelines  for  longitudinal  studies:  One  for
neuroplasticity, one for aging, and one for neurodevelopmental studies. Studies in the
framework of neuroplasticity are confined to short time-frames of weeks to months, while
studies in the framework of aging and neurodevelopment cover longer time frames of years
and, sometimes, even decades. For such extended study durations, it is particularly
important to model systematic changes of the brain over time to maintain a voxel- or
point-wise comparability across time points. Studies in the framework of neurodevelopment
require additional considerations of increasing brain and head sizes. A detailed description
of all three longitudinal processing workflows is provided inSupplemental Figure 2.
Supplemental Figure 2: CAT’s longitudinal processing workflows to examine (a) neuroplasticity, (b) aging, and
(c) neurodevelopment
The first step in all three workflows is the creation of a high-quality average image over all time points. For this
purpose, CAT realigns the images from all time points for each participant using inverse-consistent (or
symmetric) rigid-body registrations and intra-subject bias field correction. While this is sufficient to create the
required average image for the neuroplasticity and aging workflows, the neurodevelopmental workflow
requires non-linear registrations in addition. In either case, the resulting average image is segmented using
CAT’s regular processing workflow to create a subject-specifictissue probability map(TPM). This TPM is used
to enhance the time point-specific processing to create the final segmentations. The final tissue segments are
then registered to MNI space to obtain a voxel-comparability across time points and subjects, which differs
between  all  three  workflows. In the neuroplasticity workflow, an average of the time point-specific
registrations is created to register the tissue segments of all time points to MNI space. The aging workflow
does the same in principle but adds additional (very smooth) deformations between the individual images
27
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
across time points to account for inevitable age-related changes over time (e.g., enlargements of the
ventricles). In contrast, the neurodevelopmental workflow needs to account for major changes, such as overall
head and brain growth, which requires independent non-linear registrations to MNI space of all images across
time points (which are obtained using the default cross-sectional registration model).
For surface-based processing, the neuroplasticity and aging models use the processing of the time point
average image to create an average surface. The average is then adapted (deformed) to time point specific
maps used in the surface creation, whereas the neurodevelopment workflow has to run the independent
cross-sectional surface pipeline for each time point.
Supplemental Note 2. Quality Control
Processing of MRI data strongly depends on the quality of the input data. Multi-center
studies and data sharing projects, in particular, need to take into account varying image
properties due to different scanners, sequences and protocols. However, even scans
acquired on a single scanner and using the same scanning protocol may vary due to motion
or other miscellaneous artifacts. CAT provides options to perform quality checks, both on
the subject level and on the group level. More specifically, on the subject level, CAT
introduces a novel retrospective quality control framework for the quantification of quality
differences between different scans obtained on a single scanner or across different
scanners. The quality control allows for the evaluation of essential image parameters (i.e.,
noise, intensity inhomogeneities, and image resolution) and is automatically performed for
each brain when running CAT’s image processing workflow (seeSupplemental Figure 3). On
the group-level, CAT provides options to check and visualize the homogeneity of the entire
study sample, thus allowing the user to identify any outliers (seeSupplemental Figure 4).
Supplemental Note 3. Mapping onto the Cortical Surface
Surface-based analyses offer some advantages over voxel-based approaches, such as better
inter-subject registration and surface-based smoothing, which may result in a larger
statistical power and improved accuracy (Tucholka et al., 2012; Dahnke and Gaser, 2018).
CAT provides a range of options to map voxel-based values (e.g., functional, quantitative or
diffusion parameters) to individual brain surfaces for a subsequent surface-based analysis.
For this purpose, voxel-based values are extracted at multiple positions along the surface
normal at each node of the surface (seeSupplemental Figure 5). The exact positions along
the surface normal are determined by an equi-volume model (Bok, 1929), which reflects the
normal shift of cytoarchitectonic layers caused by the local folding. In addition to default
settings, users have an option to specify both the number and location of those positions
along the surface normal. The extracted values along the surface normal are then
summarized as one value per node. Here, the absolute maximum is used as a default; this is
also the recommended option to map contrast images from a first-level fMRI analysis to the
individual surface (Brodoehl et al., 2020).
28
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Supplemental Figure 3:Subject-specific quality control
Individual quality ratings for each scan are helpful for determining potential problems and issues for the use of
single scans. The ‘Image Quality Ratings’ (top) employ measures of noise, bias, and image resolution to
generate a summary grade for each image (Gilmore, Buser and Hanson, 2021). A ‘CAT Processing Report’ (left)
is automatically saved for each image after the processing workflow is completed; it provides information on
image quality measures and the overall grade, in addition to visualizations which allow for an easy assessment
of the quality of the skull stripping, tissue segmentation, and surface mapping. Moreover, a ‘Longitudinal
Report’  (right)  is  automatically  saved  when  any  of  the longitudinal pipelines have been used (see
Supplemental Notes 1). This longitudinal report – considering all images of one brain across all time points –
provides the same information as the standard cross-sectional report but focuses on the assessment of
differences between the individual time points.
29
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Supplemental Figure 4:Group-specific quality control
In addition to the subject-specific quality control, larger studies in particular might benefit from scrutinizing
those images that are either low in their individual quality ratings and/or different from the other images,
suggesting anatomic anomalies, imperfect processing, or other issues that might hamper the subsequent
statistical analysis. The ‘Check Covariance Window’ (left) allows one to detect and compare any two images
based on their similarity, by calculating the Spearman's rank correlation coefficient between all spatially
registered images (or surface parameter files) resulting in a combined correlation matrix. Higher correlation
values in that matrix indicate that the data points are more similar to each other. An additional ‘Group Boxplot’
(right) displays the averages of all correlation values for each subject and thus reflects the homogeneity of the
sample. Outliers (i.e., images with low correlation values) indicate either a potential problem (with the image
per se or with the outcomes of the image processing), or simply a variation in the neuroanatomy (e.g.,
enlarged ventricles). Such outliers should be checked carefully.
However, other options exist, such as using the minimum, mean, or weighted mean.
Alternatively, users may choose to map voxel values at multiple positions to allow for a
layer-specific analysis of ultra-high resolution functional MRI data (Waehnert et al., 2014;
Kemper et al., 2017). Finally, CAT also allows mapping voxel values at absolute distances (in
mm) from a given surface for other customized applications.
Supplemental Figure 5: Volume mapping
CAT offers multiple ways to map voxel values onto the surface. The default mapping extracts voxel values at
multiple positions along a surface normal between the white matter surface and the pial surface. The exact
location of these positions along the normal is determined by an equi-volumetric model (Bok, 1929), which
reflects the shift of cortical layers caused by local folding. However, voxel values can also be extracted at a
specific user-defined displacement (in mm) from any given surface location.
30
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Supplemental Note 4. Threshold-free Cluster Enhancement (TFCE)
SPM’s standard correction for multiple comparisons is based either on the magnitude of the
T or F statistic (correction on voxel-level) or on the extent of clusters in a thresholded
statistical map (correction on cluster level). The principle of TFCE – as implemented in CAT’s
TFCE toolbox – is to combine both approaches, which has several theoretical and practical
advantages, as detailed elsewhere (Smith and Nichols, 2009). Briefly, it retains the sensitivity
of  cluster-based  inferences,  while  avoiding  their main downsides, such as arbitrary
cluster-forming thresholds or susceptibility to non-stationarity that may compromise the
statistical validity (Hayasaka et al., 2004; Salimi-Khorshidi, Smith and Nichols, 2011; Eklund,
Nichols and Knutsson, 2016). As a special feature in CAT, the TFCE toolbox automatically
recognizes exchangeability blocks and potential nuisance parameters (Winkler et al., 2014),
which would otherwise need to be specified by the user.
31
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Supplemental Tables
Supplemental Table 1:Voxel-based ROI atlases available in CAT (as of June 2022)
AtlasReference
Neuromorphometricshttp://Neuromorphometrics.com
LPBA40http://www.loni.usc.edu/atlases/Atlas_Detail.php?atlas_id=12
(Shattuck et al., 2008)
Cobrahttp://cobralab.ca
(Winterburn et al., 2013; Park et al., 2014; Treadway et al., 2015; Amaral et al., 2018;
Tullo et al., 2018)
(built from 5 atlases provided by theComputational Brain Anatomy Laboratoryat the
Douglas Institute)
Morihttp://wiki.slicer.org/slicerWiki/index.php/Slicer3:Mori-Atlas_labels
(Oishi et al., 2009)
IBSRhttp://www.nitrc.org/projects/ibsr
Hammershttp://brain-development.org/brain-atlases/adult-brain-atlases/individual-adult-brain-atl
ases-new/
(Hammers et al., 2003)
JuBrain Anatomyhttps://github.com/inm7/jubrain-anatomy-toolbox
(Eickhoff et al., 2005)
Julich-Brain Cytoarchitectonic
Atlas
https://kg.ebrains.eu/search/instances/Dataset/3fde2768-e845-4fc3-a425-61e2c1fb6db7
(Amunts et al., 2020)
AAL3http://www.gin.cnrs.fr/en/tools/aal/
(Tzourio-Mazoyer et al., 2002; Rolls et al., 2019)
Thalamushttps://wp.unil.ch/mial/probabilistic-atlas-of-thalamic-nuclei
(Najdenovska et al., 2018)
SUIT Atlas of the human
cerebellum
https://github.com/DiedrichsenLab/cerebellar_atlases
(Diedrichsen et al., 2009)
Supplemental Table 2: Surface-based ROI atlases available in CAT (as of June 2022)
AtlasReference
DK40 (Desikan-Killiany)https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/CorticalParcellation
(Desikan et al., 2006)
Destrieuxhttps://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/DestrieuxAtlasChanges
(Destrieux et al., 2009)
Human Connectome Project
(HCP) Multi-Modal
Parcellation
https://balsa.wustl.edu/study/RVVG
(Glasser et al., 2016)
Local-Global Intrinsic
Functional Connectivity
Parcellation
https://github.com/ThomasYeoLab/CBIG/tree/master/stable_projects/brain_parcellation
/Schaefer2018_LocalGlobal
(Schaefer et al., 2018)
32
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
References:
Amaral, R.S.C.et al.(2018) ‘Manual segmentation of the fornix, fimbria, and alveus on
high-resolution 3T MRI: Application via fully-automated mapping of the human memory
circuit white and grey matter in healthy and pathological aging.’,NeuroImage,170, pp.
132–150. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.10.027.
Amunts, K.et al.(2020) ‘Julich-Brain: A 3D probabilistic atlas of the human brain’s
cytoarchitecture.’,Science.American Association for the Advancement of Science, pp.
988–992. doi:10.1126/SCIENCE.ABB4588.
Ashburner, J. (2007) ‘A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm’,NeuroImage,38, pp.
95–113. Available at: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1053811907005848
(Accessed: 2007).
Ashburner, J. and Friston, K.J. (2005) ‘Unified segmentation’,NeuroImage,26(3), pp. 839–51.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.02.018.
Ashburner, J. and Friston, K.J. (2011) ‘Diffeomorphic registration using geodesic shooting
and Gauss-Newton optimisation.’,NeuroImage,55(3), pp. 954–967.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.049.
Ashburner, J. and Ridgway, G.R. (2012) ‘Symmetric diffeomorphic modeling of longitudinal
structural MRI.’,Frontiers in neuroscience,6, p. 197. doi:10.3389/fnins.2012.00197.
Aubert-Broche, B., Evans, A.C. and Collins, L. (2006) ‘A new improved version of the realistic
digital brain phantom.’,NeuroImage.Elsevier, pp. 138–45.
doi:10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2006.03.052.
Barnes, J.et al.(2010) ‘Head size, age and gender adjustment in MRI studies: a necessary
nuisance?’,NeuroImage,53(4), pp. 1244–1255. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.025.
Bayram, E., Caldwell, J.Z.K. and Banks, S.J. (2018) ‘Current understanding of magnetic
resonance imaging biomarkers and memory in Alzheimer’s disease.’,Alzheimer’s & dementia
(New York, N. Y.),4, pp. 395–413. doi:10.1016/j.trci.2018.04.007.
Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995) ‘Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and
powerful approach to multiple testing’,Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological),pp. 289–300. Available at: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/2346101
(Accessed: 1995).
Bok, S.T. (1929) ‘Der Einfluss der in den Furchen und Windungen auftretenden Krümmungen
der Grosshirnrinde auf die Rindenarchitektur’,Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und
Psychiatrie,121(1). doi:10.1007/BF02864437.
Brodoehl, S.et al.(2020) ‘Surface-based analysis increases the specificity of cortical
activation patterns and connectivity results.’,Scientific Reports.Springer Nature.
doi:10.1038/S41598-020-62832-Z.
Carmo, M.D. (2016) ‘Differential geometry of curves and surfaces: revised and updated
second edition’. Available at:
https://books.google.com/books?hl=de&lr=&id=gg2xDQAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR11&ots=w9
Klp0OM7H&sig=PCeJOYPCZ0fm1-PfVJJxKjnYCjw (Accessed: 2016).
Dahnke, R. and Gaser, C. (2018) ‘Surface and Shape Analysis’, inBrain Morphometry.
Springer New York, pp. 51–73. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-7647-8_4.
Dahnke, R., Yotter, R.A. and Gaser, C. (2013) ‘Cortical thickness and central surface
33
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
estimation.’,NeuroImage,65, pp. 336–348. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.09.050.
Desikan, R.S.et al.(2006) ‘An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral
cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest’,NeuroImage,31(3), pp. 968–80.
doi:DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.021.
Destrieux, C.et al.(2009) ‘A sulcal depth-based anatomical parcellation of the cerebral
cortex.’,NeuroImage,47. doi:10.1016/S1053-8119(09)71561-7.
Dickerson, B.C. (2010) ‘Advances in quantitative magnetic resonance imaging-based
biomarkers for Alzheimer disease.’,Alzheimer’s research & therapy,2(4), p. 21.
doi:10.1186/alzrt45.
Diedrichsen, J.et al.(2009) ‘A probabilistic MR atlas of the human cerebellum’,NeuroImage.
Elsevier. doi:10.1016/S1053-8119(09)71166-8.
Eickhoff, S.B.et al.(2005) ‘A new SPM toolbox for combining probabilistic cytoarchitectonic
maps and functional imaging data.’,NeuroImage,25(4), pp. 1325–1335.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.034.
Eklund, A., Nichols, T.E. and Knutsson, H. (2016) ‘Cluster failure: Why fMRI inferences for
spatial extent have inflated false-positive rates.’,Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America,113(28), pp. 7900–7905.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1602413113.
Essen, D.C.V. (2005) ‘A Population-Average, Landmark- and Surface-based (PALS) atlas of
human cerebral cortex.’,NeuroImage.Elsevier, pp. 635–62.
doi:10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2005.06.058.
Fischl, B. and Dale, A.M. (2000) ‘Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from
magnetic resonance images.’,Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.National
Academy of Sciences (NAS), pp. 11050–5. doi:10.1073/PNAS.200033797.
Gilmore, A.D., Buser, N.J. and Hanson, J.L. (2021) ‘Variations in structural MRI quality
significantly impact commonly used measures of brain anatomy.’,Brain Informatics.Springer
Nature. doi:10.1186/S40708-021-00128-2.
Glasser, M.F.et al.(2016) ‘A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex’,Nature
[Preprint]. Available at:
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature18933.html (Accessed:
2016).
Hammers, A.et al.(2003) ‘Three-dimensional maximum probability atlas of the human
brain, with particular reference to the temporal lobe’,Human Brain Mapping,19, pp.
224–247.
Hayasaka, S.et al.(2004) ‘Nonstationary cluster-size inference with random field and
permutation methods.’,NeuroImage,22(2), pp. 676–687.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.01.041.
Hutton, C.et al.(2009) ‘A comparison between voxel-based cortical thickness and
voxel-based morphometry in normal aging’,NeuroImage,48(2), pp. 371–380. Available at:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S105381190900679X (Accessed: 1
November 2009).
Kemper, V.G.et al.(2017) ‘High resolution data analysis strategies for mesoscale human
functional MRI at 7 and 9.4T.’,NeuroImage.Elsevier, pp. 48–58.
doi:10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2017.03.058.
34
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Krzysztof, G.et al.(2015) ‘Brain Imaging Data Structure - a new standard for describing and
organizing human neuroimaging data’,Frontiers in Neuroscience.Frontiers Media S.A.
doi:10.3389/CONF.FNINS.2015.91.00056.
Kurth, F., Luders, E. and Gaser, C. (2015) ‘Voxel-Based Morphometry’, in, pp. 345–349.
doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-397025-1.00304-3.
Luders, E.et al.(2006) ‘A curvature-based approach to estimate local gyrification on the
cortical surface.’,NeuroImage,29(4), pp. 1224–1230.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.08.049.
Malone, I.B.et al.(2015) ‘Accurate automatic estimation of total intracranial volume: a
nuisance variable with less nuisance.’,NeuroImage,104, pp. 366–372.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.09.034.
Manjón, J.V.et al.(2010) ‘Adaptive non-local means denoising of MR images with spatially
varying noise levels.’,Journal of magnetic resonance imaging: JMRI,31(1), pp. 192–203.
doi:10.1002/jmri.22003.
Masouleh, S.K.et al.(2020) ‘Influence of Processing Pipeline on Cortical Thickness
Measurement.’,Cerebral Cortex.Oxford University Press, pp. 5014–5027.
doi:10.1093/CERCOR/BHAA097.
Mutsaerts, H.J.M.M.et al.(2020) ‘ExploreASL: An image processing pipeline for multi-center
ASL perfusion MRI studies.’,NeuroImage.Elsevier.
doi:10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2020.117031.
Najdenovska, E.et al.(2018) ‘In-vivo probabilistic atlas of human thalamic nuclei based on
diffusion- weighted magnetic resonance imaging.’,Scientific Data.Springer Nature.
doi:10.1038/SDATA.2018.270.
Oishi, K.et al.(2009) ‘Atlas-based whole brain white matter analysis using large deformation
diffeomorphic metric mapping: application to normal elderly and Alzheimer’s disease
participants’,Neuroimage,46, pp. 486–99. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.002.
Park, M.T.M.et al.(2014) ‘Derivation of high-resolution MRI atlases of the human
cerebellum at 3T and segmentation using multiple automatically generated templates.’,
NeuroImage,95, pp. 217–231. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.037.
Rajapakse, J.C., Giedd, J.N. and Rapoport, J.L. (1997) ‘Statistical approach to segmentation of
single-channel cerebral MR images.’,IEEE transactions on medical imaging,16(2), pp.
176–186. doi:10.1109/42.563663.
Reuter, M. and Fischl, B. (2011) ‘Avoiding asymmetry-induced bias in longitudinal image
processing.’,NeuroImage,57(1), pp. 19–21. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.02.076.
Reuter, M., Rosas, H.D. and Fischl, B. (2010) ‘Highly accurate inverse consistent registration:
a robust approach.’,NeuroImage,53(4), pp. 1181–1196.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.020.
Rolls, E.T.et al.(2019) ‘Automated anatomical labelling atlas 3.’,NeuroImage.Elsevier.
doi:10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2019.116189.
Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Smith, S.M. and Nichols, T.E. (2011) ‘Adjusting the effect of
nonstationarity in cluster-based and TFCE inference.’,NeuroImage,54(3), pp. 2006–2019.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.088.
Schaefer, A.et al.(2018) ‘Local-Global Parcellation of the Human Cerebral Cortex from
35
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Intrinsic Functional Connectivity MRI.’,Cerebral cortex (New York, N.Y. : 1991),28(9), pp.
3095–3114. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhx179.
Shattuck, D.W.et al.(2008) ‘Construction of a 3D probabilistic atlas of human cortical
structures.’,NeuroImage,39(3), pp. 1064–1080. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.09.031.
Smith, S.M. and Nichols, T.E. (2009) ‘Threshold-free cluster enhancement: Addressing
problems of smoothing, threshold dependence and localisation in cluster inference’,
NeuroImage,44(1), pp. 83–98. Available at:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1053811908002978 (Accessed: 2009).
Tadel, F.et al.(2011) ‘Brainstorm: a user-friendly application for MEG/EEG analysis.’,
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience.Hindawi Publishing Corporation.
doi:10.1155/2011/879716.
Tohka, J., Zijdenbos, A. and Evans, A. (2004) ‘Fast and robust parameter estimation for
statistical partial volume models in brain MRI.’,NeuroImage,23(1), pp. 84–97.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.05.007.
Toro, R.et al.(2008) ‘Brain size and folding of the human cerebral cortex.’,Cerebral Cortex.
Oxford University Press, pp. 2352–7. doi:10.1093/CERCOR/BHM261.
Treadway, M.T.et al.(2015) ‘Illness progression, recent stress, and morphometry of
hippocampal subfields and medial prefrontal cortex in major depression.’,Biological
psychiatry,77(3), pp. 285–294. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.06.018.
Tucholka, A.et al.(2012) ‘An empirical comparison of surface-based and volume-based
group studies in neuroimaging.’,NeuroImage,63(3), pp. 1443–1453.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.019.
Tullo, S.et al.(2018) ‘Warping an atlas derived from serial histology to 5 high-resolution
MRIs.’,Scientific data,5, p. 180107. doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.107.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N.et al.(2002) ‘Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using
a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain.’,NeuroImage.
Elsevier, pp. 273–89. doi:10.1006/NIMG.2001.0978.
Waehnert, M.D.et al.(2014) ‘Anatomically motivated modeling of cortical laminae.’,
NeuroImage,93 Pt 2, pp. 210–220. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.078.
Winkler, A.M.et al.(2014) ‘Permutation inference for the general linear model.’,
NeuroImage,92, pp. 381–397. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.01.060.
Winkler, A.M.et al.(2018) ‘Joint Analysis of Cortical Area and Thickness as a Replacement
for the Analysis of the Volume of the Cerebral Cortex.’,Cerebral cortex (New York, N.Y. :
1991),28(2), pp. 738–749. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhx308.
Winterburn, J.L.et al.(2013) ‘A novel in vivo atlas of human hippocampal subfields using
high-resolution 3 T magnetic resonance imaging.’,NeuroImage.Elsevier, pp. 254–65.
doi:10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2013.02.003.
Yotter, Rachel Aet al.(2011) ‘Local cortical surface complexity maps from spherical
harmonic reconstructions.’,NeuroImage,56(3), pp. 961–973.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.02.007.
Yotter, Rachel Aineet al.(2011) ‘Topological correction of brain surface meshes using
spherical harmonics.’,Human brain mapping,32(7), pp. 1109–1124.
doi:10.1002/hbm.21095.
36
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Yotter, R.A., Thompson, P.M. and Gaser, C. (2011) ‘Algorithms to improve the
reparameterization of spherical mappings of brain surface meshes.’,Journal of
neuroimaging : official journal of the American Society of Neuroimaging,21(2), pp.
e134–e147. doi:10.1111/j.1552-6569.2010.00484.x.
37
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted June 13, 2022. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.11.495736doi: bioRxiv preprint