

 
 
 
1 
 
PRESS RELEASE 
 
MAISONS DU MONDE 2020-2024: 
A NEW CHAPTER IN OUR GROWTH STORY 
________________________________________ 
 
A renewed growth model to become the preferred lifestyle partner: 
• An increasingly omnichannel, international and data-driven company 
• A strengthened offer and heightened customer engagement to enhance brand attractiveness 
• New growth avenues to expand the core business: Marketplace and services 
• Acceleration of B2B, franchising and USA expansion 
 
Our 2020-2024 ambitions
1
: 
• Delivering 10%+ sales CAGR to exceed €2.0 billion in sales in 2024 
• Sales around 60% digital
2
 and over 50% international by end of plan 
• Robust  profitability  with  EBITDA  margin  target  of  12%  in  2024  and  10%+  net  income  CAGR 
throughout the plan 
• High cash flow generation, with more than €300 million cumulated recurring free cash flow
3
 over 
the plan 
________________________________________ 
 
Nantes, 18 June 2019 
 
Maisons du Monde (Euronext Paris: MDM, ISIN Code: FR0013153541), a European leader in affordable and 
inspirational decoration and furniture homeware, is hosting today its Capital Markets Day. During this event, 
Maisons du Monde will present its 2020-2024 strategic plan and new financial targets, building on its unique 
model and advanced omnichannel proposition to continue its growth story and be the preferred lifestyle partner 
for its customers. 
 
On this occasion, Julie Walbaum, Chief Executive Officer of Maisons du Monde declared: 
“I am very proud to open today a new chapter in the Maisons du Monde growth story and reveal our ambition 
to become the preferred lifestyle partner for our consumers. Building on our distinctive offer, our strong retailing 
model and our powerful brand, we are well placed to sharpen our differentiated positioning in a fast-changing 
market. With a clear strategy and a renewed growth model, we will reach more than €2 billion in sales in 2024. 
Over the next five years, we will reinforce our omnichannel proposition by leveraging our seamless integration 
of stores and online and our growing data capabilities and we will boost our international expansion through a 
smart  localization  approach.  We  will  also  develop  complementary  growth  avenues,  launching  a  selective 
marketplace  to  become  the go-to curator  for  stylish  homes  and  introducing  new  services  to  provide 
comprehensive solutions for our customers, notably through decoration advice. In addition, we will accelerate 
our growth in B2B and franchising and will further expand our presence in the US. As a responsible company, 
we  will  also  step  up  our  CSR  commitments,  with  advances  in  terms  of  offer,  logistics  and  employee 
engagement. We  are confident  this  plan  will  allow  us  to  deliver  double-digit  annual  sales  growth,  robust 
profitability and strong cash flow over the next five years.”  
                                                 
1
 Before the application of the IFRS 16 standard. 
2
 Digital sales i nclude online sales and click-in-store sales. 
3
 Recurri ng  free  cash  flow is defined  as  EBITDA mi nus change  in  worki ng  capital requirement, change  i n  other  operati ng  items and 
recurring capital expenditure. 

 
 
 
2 
 
Maisons du Monde’s ambition is to become the preferred lifestyle partner, by offering everyone a rich and 
relevant  set  of  solutions,  providing  a  seamless  and  enjoyable  customer  experience,  engaging  them  in  an 
ongoing conversation and conveying values of responsibility and inclusiveness. 
 
A clear roadmap to achieve Maisons du Monde’s vision 
• An  even  more  differentiated  offer: Maisons  du  Monde  aims  to  sharpen  its  product  leadership  by 
reinforcing  its  creativity  through  more  themes  and  capsule  collections  with  partners  and  by  developing 
product customization. 
• Increasingly digital and data-driven business: Maisons du Monde’s business will become increasingly 
digital and data-driven, with further integration of online and offline operations. By 2024, digital sales will 
increase  more  than  two  and  a  half  times,  taking  online  to  30-35%  of  sales  and  total  digital  sales 
(including click-in-store) to around 60% of total sales, with an international focus. Maisons du Monde 
will  achieve  this  objective  through increased  marketing  investment  for  better  brand  awareness,  further 
improvement in the user experience and a tailored international approach. 
• Updated  store  expansion  strategy  to  boost  international  development: Maisons  du  Monde  will 
continue to dynamically manage its store network and reinforce its store concept, with the optimization of 
its French network (10-20 net openings over the period) and continued International expansion. Of the 80 
to 100 planned net store openings through 2024, around 80% will be outside of France, increasing Maisons 
du Monde’s European footprint in existing geographies. Store format mix will be adapted to each market 
and may include premium locations in city centers to enhance brand awareness and boost online activity. 
• Industrialized approach to supply chain: In order to support online growth and international expansion, 
our  supply  chain  will  be  further  upgraded.  Logistics  efficiency  in  our  central  warehouse  will  continue  to 
improve  by densifying  space  and  adopting  lean  management  methods.  Additionally,  a  new  65,000 sqm 
distribution center located in Northwestern France will become operational in 2021 and automated in 2022. 
This new logistics model, combined with advanced data-driven inventory management, is a cornerstone of 
our operational performance, which will further improve the customer experience and satisfaction. 
• Upgraded CSR ambition: Convinced that companies should be leading actors in environmental and social 
responsibility, Maisons du Monde’s new growth plan includes an upgraded CSR ambition. We aim to reduce 
our global carbon intensity by 25% in 2024, by reinforcing supply chain transparency, reducing our carbon 
footprint throughout the value chain, increasing the range of sustainable products and developing services 
in the circular economy concept. 
 
New growth avenues to extend core business 
• Becoming the go-to curator for stylish homes with the launch of Maisons du Monde’s marketplace: 
In 2020, Maisons du Monde will launch a selective marketplace, the logical next step for its curated model. 
Through  this  extended  offer,  Maisons  du  Monde  will  increase  traffic  to  its  website  and  stores  and  raise 
brand awareness across its markets. Maisons du Monde’s marketplace vendors are expected to generate 
€160 million to €180 million  gross  merchandise  value  at  the  end  of  the  plan,  with  an  EBITDA-accretive 
model. 
• Evolving from pure retailer to lifestyle partner with enriched service offering: Services are essential 
to providing an ongoing enjoyable experience and strengthening our proximity to customers. Over the life 
of  the  plan,  we  will  further  develop  services  through  our  customer  pathways,  including  multiple  delivery 
options, product upcycling and recycling, payment solutions and a suite of tools around decoration advice. 
With Rhinov, the interior decoration start-up in which Maisons du Monde  has just taken a majority stake, 
we will generate €20 million to €40 million in sales and further position ourselves as the preferred lifestyle 
partner.  We  will  also  step  up  our  engagement  with  our  user  communities  by  providing  extensive  brand 
content and encouraging peer-to-peer interactions. 
  

 
 
 
3 
 
• B2B & franchising, a natural extension of our successful B2C model: B2B represented €30 million in 
sales  in  2018.  The  market  offers  strong  further  potential,  as trends  in  hospitality  and  workspaces  match 
Maisons  du  Monde’s  style  and  inspiration-based  DNA.  We  will  expand  our  B2B  product  range  and 
marketing  efforts  to  achieve sales of above €100 million  in  2024,  with  an  accretive  impact  on  EBITDA 
margin.  Franchising,  through  an  accelerated  roll-out  program  with  our  existing  partners,  will  lead  to 
€60 million in sales under banner in 2024. 
• The USA, a new growth engine for Maisons du Monde: Following its successful integration into Maisons 
du Monde, Modani will be the Group’s primary growth engine in the USA. We expect Modani to reach sales 
of  around  $200 million  in  2024,  with  a  further  acceleration  of  store  openings  (from  13  to  more  tha n 
50 stores), an expanded decoration offer and a ramp-up in online. Maisons du Monde will follow a tactical 
test-and-learn development approach for its own banner, with at least five store openings planned throug h 
2024. 
 
2020-2024 financial objectives
4
 
Maisons du Monde aims to deliver: 
• Continued  double-digit  sales  growth: 10%+ CAGR to exceed €2.0 billion  in  sales  in  2024,  leveraging 
our advanced omnichannel model, increasing international presence and the contribution from new growth 
avenues; 
• Robust profitability: EBITDA margin is targeted at 12% in 2024 and will be in a range of between 11% 
and 12% in the intermediate years of the plan. This evolution is the result of strategic choices in order to 
strengthen our model and sustain our double-digit sales growth. Net income will grow in line with sales at 
a 10%+ CAGR throughout the plan; 
• Strong  cash  generation  and  shareholder  return: Cumulated  recurring  free  cash-flow  will  be  above 
€300 million over the 2020-2024 period and will allow further deleveraging, to 0.5x EBITDA in 2024, while 
maintaining our dividend policy, with a payout ratio of 30% to 40% of net income. 
 
*** 
 
Webcast 
Maisons du Monde is hosting today in Paris a Capital Markets Day to present its 2020-2024 strategic plan and 
new  financial  targets.  A  live  webcast  of  the  event  will  start  at  09:30am  CEST  (08:30am  BST)  and can be 
accessed at https://edge.media-server.com/m6/p/8rmvcgst. 
The presentation will be available for download on the “Finance” section of Maisons du Monde’s website at 
https://corporate.maisonsdumonde.com/en. 
 
*** 
 
  
                                                 
4
 Before the application of the IFRS 16 standard. 

 
 
 
4 
 
GLOSSARY 
 
 
• Sales: Represent the revenue from sales of decorative items and furniture through the Group’s stores, 
website and B2B business. They mainly exclude customer contribution to delivery costs, revenue from 
logistics services provided to third parties, and franchising revenue. 
• Digital sales: Include online sales and click-in-store sales, which correspond to customer orders made in-
store, through digital devices such as tablets, of products not physically displayed in-store. 
• Gross Merchandise Value: Is defined as the total value of merchandise sold through a marketplace. 
• Gross margin: Is defined as sales minus cost of sales. Gross margin is also expressed as a percentage 
of sales. 
• EBITDA: Is defined as current operating profit, excluding depreciation, amortization, and allowance for 
provisions, the change in the fair value of derivative financial instruments, and pre-opening expenses. 
• EBIT: Is defined as EBITDA after depreciation, amortization, and allowance for provisions. 
• Recurring free cash flow: Is defined as EBITDA minus change in working capital requirement, change in 
other operating items and recurring capital expenditure. 
• Net debt: Is defined as the Group’s convertible bonds (“OCEANE”), term loan, revolving credit facilities, 
finance lease debt, deposits and bank borrowings, net of cash and cash equivalents. 
• Leverage ratio: Is defined as net debt divided by EBITDA (including Modani on a pro forma basis for the 
period, excluding the liabilities from the earn-out and the put option). 
 
*** 
 
  

 
 
 
5 
 
Financial calendar
5
 
29 July 2019 First-half 2019 results (press release and conference call after market close) 
30 October 2019 Third-quarter 2019 sales (press release and conference call after market close) 
 
*** 
 
Disclaimer: Forward Looking Statement 
This press release contains certain statements that constitute "forward-looking statements", including but not limited to 
statements that are predictions of or indicate future events, trends, plans or objectives, based on certain assumptions or 
which do not directly relate to historical or current facts. Such forward-looking statements are based on management's 
current expectations and beliefs and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to 
differ materially from the future results expressed, forecasted or implied by such forward-looking statements. Accordingly, 
no representation is made that any of these statements or forecasts will come to pass or that any forecast results will be 
achieved. Any forward-looking statements included in this press release speak only as of the date hereof and will not give 
rise to updates or revision. For a more complete list and description of such risks and uncertainties, refer to Maisons du 
Monde’s filings with the French Autorité des marchés financiers. 
 
*** 
 
About Maisons du Monde 
Maisons du Monde is a creator of inspirational lifestyle universes in the homeware industry, offering distinctive and 
affordable decoration and furniture collections that showcase multiple styles. The Group develops its business through an 
integrated and complementary omnichannel approach, leveraging its international network of stores, its websites and its 
catalogues. The Group was founded in France in 1996 and has expanded profitably across Europe since 2003, reporting 
sales of €1,111 million and EBITDA of €148 million in 2018. At 31 December 2018, the Group operated 336 stores in 
9 countries including France, Italy, Spain, Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, the United States and the United 
Kingdom, and derived 40% of its sales outside France. The Group has also built a successful complementary and 
comprehensive ecommerce platform, whose sales grew by over 30% per year on average between 2010 and 2018. This 
platform, which accounted for 23% of the Group's sales in 2018, is available in the countries where it operates stores plus 
Austria, the Netherlands and Portugal. In 2018, the Group acquired a majority stake in Modani, a furniture chain present 
in the United States through its stores and ecommerce business. Modani, founded in 2017, is an aspirational lifestyle 
brand, offering high-quality proprietary modern, contemporary and mid-century furniture at affordable price points, with a 
nationwide presence through a network of 13 showrooms. 
corporate.maisonsdumonde.com 
 
*** 
 
Contacts 
Investor Relations Press Relations 
Laurent Sfaxi – +33 2 51 71 52 07 Clémentine Prat – +33 2 51 79 54 08 
lsfaxi@maisonsdumonde.com cprat@maisonsdumonde.com 
 
                                                 
5
 Indicative timetable. 